

===== PAGE 1 =====
K. W. O’Haver et al.
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
140­
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Kenneth W. O’Haver, Christopher K. Barker, G. Daniel Dockery, 
and James D. Huffaker
ABSTRACT
Radar systems are critical elements of air and missile defense systems. The Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) has a long history of leading the development or improvement 
of advanced radar systems through the application of science and technology advancements via 
a systems engineering process. This article summarizes APL’s significant contributions to advanced 
radar development, beginning with the creation of multifunction phased-array radar technology 
for the Aegis program, continuing through solid-state radar and ballistic missile defense radar 
development, and concluding with recent contributions to the U.S. Navy’s new Air and Missile 
Defense Radar.
the field or at sea, and evaluating system effectiveness 
against continually evolving threats.
In this article, we review many of the significant 
advanced radar development accomplishments APL 
has achieved by applying the systems engineering pro­
cess to the air and missile defense mission. We begin 
with the development and prototyping of multifunction 
phased-array radar technology that was foundational 
for the Aegis program. We continue by reviewing APL’s 
contributions to modeling and characterizing effects of 
the environment on radar performance, the importance 
of which was highlighted by early Aegis testing. The 
advancement and proliferation of anti-ship cruise mis­
siles drove the need for the development of solid-state 
radars. We describe APL’s contributions to the develop­
ment of the enabling active electronically scanned array 
(AESA) technology. We then discuss APL’s role in bal­
listic missile defense (BMD) radar development and con­
clude by summarizing APL’s significant contributions to 
INTRODUCTION
The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab­
oratory (APL) was founded in 1942 for the purpose of 
developing a radio proximity fuze, a device that would 
trigger an anti-aircraft shell when it came close to its 
target. In 1943, USS  Helena became the first ship to 
shoot down an enemy aircraft by means of proximity-
fuzed projectiles. This rapid development and transi­
tion to production marked the beginning of APL’s 
75-year involvement in developing new or significantly 
improved air and missile defense capabilities through 
the application of science and technology advancements 
via a systems engineering process. This process begins 
with recognizing and quantifying the operational need, 
usually driven by the adversary’s incorporation of new 
technology or tactics. The process proceeds through 
developing operationally responsive system concepts 
and requirements, applying technology and performing 
critical experiments, transferring operationally validated 
technical approaches to industrial producers, testing in 


===== PAGE 2 =====
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
141­
the recent development of the Navy’s new Air and Mis­
sile Defense Radar (AMDR).
AEGIS MULTIFUNCTION PHASED-ARRAY RADAR
As the capabilities of air threats continued to evolve 
in the 1950s, it became apparent that naval weapons sys­
tems would require radars that could reposition beams 
within microseconds to track increasing numbers of tar­
gets. APL initially attempted to address this need with 
an early experimental system concept named Typhon.1 
The Typhon antenna electronically switched beams by 
means of a Luneburg lens. Energy entering the lens at 
a particular point will exit as a plane wave, and energy 
entering at another point will exit as a plane wave in a 
different direction. This principle was used to devise a 
radar that switched energy to various lens input ports 
using microwave switches, with the resulting beams 
being switched to various angular locations within 
microseconds. Numerous technical problems were solved 
in developing the Typhon system and installing it on the 
test ship USS Norton Sound, and successful search and 
track tests were performed. However, the system could 
not be produced at an acceptable cost, and the program 
was terminated in 1963.
In the latter stages of the Typhon program, research­
ers at APL and elsewhere began developing electronic 
phase-shifter technology, which enabled a high-gain 
phased-array antenna in which the radar beam could 
be steered or pointed electronically through the control 
of phase across the radiating elements of an aperture.2 
A 1965 Navy study identified the requirement for a 
phased-array radar with combined surveillance, track­
ing, and missile-guidance capabilities along with high 
resistance to electronic countermeasures. Given APL’s 
background in phased-array technology and naval air 
defense, the Navy directed APL to begin a program to 
reduce technological risk and demonstrate the requi­
site phased-array radar performance. This experimental 
development program was named the Advanced Multi-
Function Array Radar (AMFAR).
AMFAR to AN/SPY-1
The AMFAR demonstrator was conceived, designed, 
fabricated, and tested by APL between 1964 and 1969 
and served as the advanced development model for tech­
nologies incorporated into the Aegis AN/SPY-1A radar. 
It brought all elements of the radar system together and 
demonstrated the feasibility of automatic detection 
and tracking with resistance to environmental clut­
ter through computer control. Key technology areas 
addressed by the AMFAR program included tube-based 
transmitter design, planar phased-array design, elec­
tronic counter-countermeasures (now known as elec­
tronic protection) development, automatic detection 
and tracking, and computer control. The major experi­
mental subsystems included a high-power transmitter, a 
phased-array antenna, a signal-processor system, and a 
computer control system. The AMFAR system, installed 
on the roof of Building 6 at APL in the late 1960s, is 
depicted in Fig. 1 along with the conventional rotating 
reflector radar antenna of the era.
The AMFAR development effort produced several 
antenna and transmitter innovations. APL achieved 
a breakthrough in ferrite phase-shifter development 
by using a garnet ferromagnetic material that proved 
relatively insensitive to temperature variations.2 A new 
array beamformer was developed that provided indepen­
dent sum and difference monopulse channels for angle 
estimation. The phased array was successfully devel­
oped, and the array components (Fig. 2) demonstrated 
the required reliability and performance at high power. 
The transmitter concept called for parallel operation of 
multiple crossed-field amplifiers. As part of the trans­
mitter development, APL developed the concept of an 
array of subarrays in which a subarray, say 64 elements, 
was fed by a high-power microwave tube during trans­
mission. By using dozens of tubes, very high power levels 
were achieved even though the extremely high power 
levels of conventional high-power radar transmitters 
were not present anywhere in the system. In addition, 
the large number of tubes provided redundancy since 
the loss of one or two tubes caused modest degradation. 
The antenna and transmitter concepts developed with 
AMFAR were incorporated into the SPY-1A system.
The functions of the AMFAR signal processor were 
to receive, amplify, and process the signals received by 
the radar from targets and the environment. The pro­
cessing involved discriminating target returns from 
competing signals (ground clutter, rain, electronic jam­
ming, etc.) and making measurements (range, angle, and 
speed) under all environmental conditions and without 
errors from competing signals. The development of the 
Figure 1.  APL-developed AMFAR (left) shown in contrast to the 
conventional rotating reflector radar antenna of the era (right).


===== PAGE 3 =====
K. W. O’Haver et al.
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
142­
AMFAR signal processor, including a waveform and 
frequency generator, a synchronizer, and the processor 
itself, included several innovations that are described 
by Phillips.4 These innovations included a new modula­
tion technique that reduced extraneous transmit signals 
outside the radar band, a timing computer that could 
develop any sequence of timing signals for the radar, and 
the use of phase-coherent digital pulse compression pro­
cessing and noncoherent multifrequency sampling tech­
niques, coupled with coherent cancellation of sequential 
returns. Another new feature of AMFAR was the radar 
computer and control program, which executed the 
functions of scheduling, tracking, and testing within a 
single transmit/receive (T/R) period in order to keep the 
radar and computer in time synchronization.
SPY-1 Engineering Development and 
Continuous Upgrade
The AMFAR program served to demonstrate the 
technology maturity of key subsystems and the ability 
of a tactical radar to satisfy operational requirements for 
surveillance, tracking, and missile guidance with resis­
tance to electronic countermeasures. The innovations 
helped clear the way for competitive bids on the Aegis 
Engineering Development Program, which was approved 
in 1969. Once the prime contractor, RCA (now Lock­
heed Martin), was selected to develop the SPY-1A radar 
system, APL’s role transitioned to that of technical advi­
sor to Navy program management. In this role, APL 
provided assurance that industry designs satisfied the 
Navy’s technical requirements, 
identified and assessed risk, pro­
posed alternative approaches 
and conducted critical experi­
ments when appropriate, and 
transitioned results to industry. 
For example, APL identified a 
way to reduce the number of 
transmitters from four to two, 
while maintaining performance, 
by developing high-power wave­
guide switch technology that 
allowed a single transmitter to be 
time-shared between two arrays. 
Similarly, APL devised improve­
ments that consolidated signal 
processing and control functions 
into a single centralized unit. 
Irzinski5 summarizes these and 
other early system improvements 
developed by APL.
As the technical advisor for 
Aegis, APL has worked in con­
cert with the Navy, the prime 
contractor, and other industrial 
agents and government team 
members to keep the program abreast of advances in 
technology through system upgrades that improved per­
formance or reduced cost and weight. A major upgrade 
was realized in the 1980s with the advent of the AN/
SPY-1B radar. SPY-1B leveraged advances in solid-state 
electronics to reduce signal-processor size and cost 
while improving processing efficiency and adding new 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 2.  AMFAR phased-array technology. (a) Completed phased array with beamformer, 
16 subarrays, and phase-shifter drivers. (b) Assembled subarray. (c) Components of the strip­
line power divider shown disassembled. (d) Ferrite phase shifter. (Reproduced from Ref. 3.)
Figure 3.  USS Momsen (DDG 92) with the two AN/SPY-1D(V) radar 
forward faces visible on the deckhouse. (U.S. Navy photo by Mass 
Communication Specialist 2nd Class James R. Evans/Released.)


===== PAGE 4 =====
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
143­
electronic protection capabilities. Similarly, changes in 
the array architecture and advances in manufacturing 
tolerances and array calibration techniques allowed the 
SPY-1B phased array to achieve low sidelobe perfor­
mance and improved electronic protection.
The SPY-1 radar (Fig.  3) that emerged from APL’s 
original concept development studies and the experi­
mental development of AMFAR, and has evolved 
through numerous improvements and upgrades, has 
served as the centerpiece for the Navy’s Aegis Combat 
System for nearly four decades. Over 90 ships have been 
outfitted with a version of the SPY-1 radar.
PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL CHARACTERIZATION
One of the drivers for the development of SPY-1 was 
the need to address the low-altitude anti-ship cruise 
missile threat, which stresses the engagement time­
line of the combat system because threats emerge from 
behind the Earth’s horizon at relatively short ranges 
from the ship. To characterize the performance of the 
new radar system, two things were needed: (i) a high-
fidelity simulation of the radar, including the schedul­
ing of rapid confirmation dwells and the ability to do 
Monte Carlo statistical analysis, and (ii) the capabil­
ity to predict the impact of low-altitude propagation 
and surface clutter on system performance. In the late 
1970s, APL developed the first incarnation of the Firm­
Track Simulation, which provided the ability to analyze 
behaviors specific to electronically steered phased-array 
radars. The term firm track was established at this time 
to capture the track initiation process that is enabled 
by this class of radar.
The APL FirmTrack Simulation has evolved along­
side the SPY-1 radar system and its expanding missions 
(open-ocean air defense, air defense in littoral regions, 
ballistic missile defense, and integrated air and mis­
sile defense). As ship-based testing of the first genera­
tion of SPY-1 radars began, the FirmTrack Simulation 
was used to compare radar performance predictions to 
the actual performance observed in the testing. At that 
time, the simulation included models to account for low-
elevation multipath and spherical Earth horizon effects 
with nominal atmosphere refraction. Despite this fidel­
ity, the observed firm track performance of the radar 
rarely agreed with the simulation predictions for low-
altitude test targets, and the observed performance was 
extremely variable. It was clear that performance pre­
dictions must include atmospheric refraction effects on 
low-elevation RF propagation to enable understanding 
of radar performance in this regime.
Modeling of Environmental Effects on Radar 
Performance
By the early 1980s, APL had developed the Electro­
magnetic Parabolic Equation (EMPE) model to describe 
electromagnetic propagation in the lower atmosphere.6 
The Aegis program began supporting this work in 
1982, and by 1985, the EMPE was being used in con­
cert with the FirmTrack Simulation to account for 
low-altitude propagation effects in SPY-1 performance 
predictions. After experimental validation and many 
fidelity improvements, the model was renamed the Tro­
pospheric Electromagnetic Parabolic Equation Routine 
(TEMPER). Today, TEMPER is capable of predicting 
electromagnetic propagation over land and sea and 
accurately represents radar and communication system 
antenna patterns.7 TEMPER has been accredited mul­
tiple times in support of many Navy and Missile Defense 
Agency (MDA) programs and is widely used by Navy 
laboratories and industry partners.
TEMPER calculations confirmed that radar behav­
ior is very sensitive to the atmospheric refraction con­
4 m evaporation duct
14 m evaporation duct
24 m evaporation duct
20
40
60
80
100
Altitude (m)
50
40
30
20
10
0
20
0
0
0
40
60
80
100
Altitude (m)
50
40
30
20
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Altitude (m)
50
40
30
20
10
0
Range (km)
F2 in decibels
Range (km)
Range (km)
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
Figure 4.  TEMPER propagation factor plots at 10 GHz for various evaporation ducts.


===== PAGE 5 =====
K. W. O’Haver et al.
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
144­
ditions, which in turn depend on layers of temperature 
and humidity (water vapor) in the lower atmosphere. 
These effects can range from substantial changes in 
the apparent range to the radar horizon (beyond which 
targets are shadowed by the Earth) to the trapping of 
energy near the sea surface, resulting in greatly extended 
detection ranges for low-altitude targets. In the latter 
case, this same propagation phenomenon also produces 
greatly increased backscatter from the sea and often very 
distant land.
Figure  4 illustrates the impact that certain types 
of atmospheric “ducts” (trapping layers) can have on 
propagation. The case shown is for a 10-GHz transmit­
ter located at 15 m above the sea surface. These plots 
are best described as contours of radiated power nor­
malized to what would have been radiated had there 
been no Earth or atmosphere present. The contour 
values represent the differences from 0 dB that occur 
as a result of reflections/blockages from the Earth as 
well as the bending of energy due to the atmospheric 
refraction. These plots are “Earth-flattened,” so the 
deep blue region in Fig. 4a is the result of shadowing 
due to the Earth’s curvature; the radar horizon range 
versus altitude approximately follows the yellow-green 
15-dB contour.
Figure 4a is representative of a near “standard atmo­
sphere” condition, with no trapping layers present, 
while the remaining plots have increasingly large sur­
face trapping layers present. In this figure, one can see 
that the distribution of transmitted power is drastically 
affected by the assumed atmospheric condition; ducting 
(trapping layers) can completely overcome the Earth’s 
curvature, causing energy to propagate well beyond 
the horizon. The long-range propagation effects are 
even more evident in Fig. 5, illustrating the impact of a 
large surface duct in the Arabian Gulf on surface clut­
ter. Radar “clutter” refers to unwanted backscatter from 
the surface, which can compete with the signal reflect­
ing from the targets the radar is intended to detect and 
track. Figure 5a shows contours of terrain elevation to 
provide geographical context, and Figs. 5b and 5c show 
contours of propagation factor data (quantity plotted in 
Fig. 4) multiplied by the normalized clutter backscatter 
cross section. This quantity is integrated over the radar’s 
resolution cell to give a value that is proportional to the 
power received from that part of the surface.
In Fig. 5b, there is no ducting and there is very little 
surface clutter beyond the near-in horizon around the 
ship location; some of the highest mountains to the east 
are just barely being illuminated by the radar. In Fig. 5c, 
however, the effects of a typical large surface duct in 
that region are shown; surface clutter is enhanced in all 
directions, and the trapped energy is reaching land in 
all directions. The Navy is well aware of the need to 
deal with the detrimental impacts of strong, long-range 
surface clutter in the Arabian Gulf.
400
300
200
100
0
–100
–200
–300
–400
Range north (km)
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
One-way propagation factor (dB)
(b)
400
300
200
100
0
–100
–200
–300
–400–400
–200
0
200
400
Range north (km)
Range east (km)
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
(c)
One-way propagation factor (dB)
400
300
200
100
0
–100
–200
–300
–400
Range north (km)
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
Terrain height (km)
(a)
Figure 5.  Impact of a large surface duct on surface clutter. 
(a) Terrain elevation. (b) Propagation factor impact with no duct­
ing present. (c) Propagation factor impact with typical large sur­
face duct. (Reproduced from Ref. 6.)


===== PAGE 6 =====
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
145­
Characterization of Atmospheric Refractive Conditions
Given a model like TEMPER, and clutter models that 
use TEMPER, the next challenge was to be able to mea­
sure and characterize the atmospheric refractive condi­
tions to provide an accurate input to TEMPER. As part 
of the effort to validate TEMPER with measured data, 
several effective methods to collect the needed data were 
developed, including using meteorological sensors on 
boats, ships, aircraft, small rockets, and balloons (Fig. 6).6 
The Automated Environmental Assessment System is a 
portable METOC (meteorological) station that is used 
on Navy ships and test platforms to collect near-surface 
data. The rocketsonde in Fig. 6b is a hobby rocket-based 
system that deploys a radiosonde with METOC sensors 
on a parachute; data are transmitted to a surface station 
as the package descends. The Helicopter Atmospheric 
Profiling System is shown in Figs. 6c and 6d; this system 
is used to collect data during heli­
copter descents to obtain a set of 
range-dependent refractivity pro­
files. These systems have been 
used extensively, and with great 
success, in many Navy tests and 
propagation experiments over the 
past 30 years.
The use of the FirmTrack 
Simulation, TEMPER, and the 
above-mentioned METOC data-
collection systems became stan­
dard practice, starting in the late 
1980s, for interpreting observed 
performance, relative to require­
ments, for Navy tests. APL had 
excellent success reconstructing 
the observed firm track ranges for 
test targets if the proper METOC 
data had been collected. In Fig. 7, 
the results from several Navy tests 
are shown; the vertical blue bars 
are relative firm track ranges for 
repeated presentations of the same low-altitude test 
target to SPY-1 radars during different test events; the 
cases are arranged in order of increasing firm track 
range. For the events during which METOC data were 
collected, red bars are also shown. The two takeaways 
from Fig.  7 are (i)  the firm track ranges against very 
similar target presentations are varying by more than a 
factor of two, and (ii) when environmental data are col­
lected, the reconstructed and observed firm track ranges 
agree very well. Although range units are not shown in 
the figure, the differences between reconstructed and 
measurement ranges are very small relative to the over­
all variability seen across test events.
As a result of the success in explaining observed radar 
performance, there was a significant effort to incorpo­
rate automated versions of METOC sensors, TEMPER, 
and the FirmTrack Simulation into an integrated tacti­
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.  APL-developed meteorological measurement systems. (a) Automated Environmental Assessment System (AEAS) meteorolog­
ical box; (b) rocketsonde; (c) rocketsonde and Helicopter Atmospheric Profiling System (HAPS) sensors; (d) HAPS installed on a helicopter.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 13
14
15 16
17
18
19
20
Case number
Increasing ﬁrm track range
Figure 7.  Impact of environmental data collection on firm track range reconstruction. The 
blue bars show the observed firm track range, and the red bars show the reconstructed firm 
track range when environmental data were collected. (Reprinted from Ref. 8.)


===== PAGE 7 =====
K. W. O’Haver et al.
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
146­
cal decision aid, called SEAWASP (Shipboard Environ­
mental Assessment and Weapon System Performance).8 
Despite SEAWASP ultimately not being funded for 
installation on Aegis ships, this work has influenced 
other tactical decision aid programs, including the Aegis 
SPY-1 Sliderule.
Although not discussed here, TEMPER and the envi­
ronmental characterization process have been used for 
the analysis and development of other radar and weapon 
system elements, including semi-active missile illumina­
tion and Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) 
connectivity. Furthermore, the phenomena character­
ized, and in some cases discovered, by APL’s environ­
mental work have driven certain radar characteristics 
in new designs, including bandwidth and refraction-
induced angle bias correction. TEMPER is extensively 
used to develop requirements for new systems and is 
delivered to industry as government-furnished informa­
tion in major Navy acquisition programs.
SOLID-STATE RADAR
The continued advancement and proliferation of low-
flying anti-ship cruise missiles, highlighted by the near 
loss of USS Stark in the Persian Gulf in 1987, drove the 
need to develop a leak-proof defense of own-ship from 
cruise missile attack. This capability required improved 
sensors to detect small, fast raids of maneuvering targets 
as they cross the ship’s radar horizon. Target detection 
was made more difficult by the increasing threat capabil­
ities, anomalous propagation conditions, and increased 
radar clutter in the littoral regions of operation that were 
becoming more the norm. APL engineers participated 
in multiple studies to develop sensor and combat system 
solutions to these challenges. In particular, APL led the 
overall direction of the NATO Anti-Air Warfare System 
(NAAWS) study, which was completed in 1991. From 
a radar perspective, these studies identified solid-state 
radar technology as a means of providing the enhanced 
sensitivity, fast update rates, and the improved system 
stability required to detect low-flying anti-ship cruise 
missiles in sea or land clutter.
AESA Technology Development
Radar systems developed in the 1970s and 1980s were 
commonly passive arrays in which RF power was gener­
ated at a centralized tube-based transmitter, carried to 
the array via waveguide, and divided in the array using 
a transmit beamformer. High-power phase shifters were 
used at each element to steer the beam. The power loss 
between the transmitter and the radiating elements was 
typically quite high, resulting in reduced transmit power 
and low system efficiency. On receive, the phase shift­
ers and receive beamformer were used to combine the 
received signals in phase for the steered beam direction, 
form monopulse sum and difference channels, and pres­
ent these signals to centralized receivers. For a high-power 
transmit and low sidelobe receive array desired for naval 
radar applications, the combined transmit and receive 
losses of passive arrays were typically quite high and lim­
ited overall system sensitivity (generally speaking, a mea­
sure of the radar’s ability to detect small signals in noise). 
The Aegis phased array described above is an example of 
a passive array. An advancement in the Aegis design was 
the use of a subarray in the transmit beamformer that 
allowed the combining of dozens of medium-power tube-
based transmitters to improve reliability and prevent very 
high power from appearing at any one location.
The next step in this evolutionary process was to place 
solid-state transistor-based power amplifiers at each ele­
ment of the array. Such arrays are known as active elec­
tronically scanned arrays (AESAs), and radars that use 
AESAs are commonly referred to as solid-state radars. 
An AESA uses T/R modules placed at each element of 
the array. A typical radar T/R module (Fig. 8) provides 
several stages of RF power amplification on transmit, low 
noise amplification on receive, a limiter for receive pro­
tection, a phase shifter for beamsteering and calibration, 
and a variable attenuator for receive gain control. Rela­
tive to a passive array, the AESA architecture minimizes 
Power
amp
Power
amp
Harmonic
ﬁlter
Circulator
Phase
shifter
VGA
Amp
Amp
Driver
amp
Switch
Switch
T/R
LNA
Limiter
Figure 8.  Typical radar T/R module and block diagram. Amp, amplifier; LNA, low-noise amplifier; VGA, variable gain amplifier. (Reprinted 
from Ref. 9.)


===== PAGE 8 =====
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
147­
transmission and reception losses and greatly improves 
system sensitivity. Other radar system advantages pro­
vided by the AESA architecture include the ability to 
operate at higher-duty factors, improved system stability 
for target detection in clutter, improved antenna pattern 
flexibility for electronic protection, general ability to sup­
port wider operating bandwidths, and improved system 
reliability.9 With RF power amplification distributed 
across the array in the form of T/R modules, the need for 
a large centralized transmitter is also eliminated.
AESAs were enabled by the development of mono­
lithic microwave integrated circuit (MMIC) technology, 
which permitted the required microwave circuits to be 
realized at chip-scale densities with economical large-
scale production because of the batch processing tech­
niques used in their fabrication. Galium arsenide MMIC 
technology emerged in the late 1980s and continued 
to mature throughout the 1990s through the support 
of considerable DoD and commercial investment. APL 
spearheaded the introduction of AESA technology into 
surface Navy systems through the CEC program. In 1989, 
AESA and T/R module technology development became 
imperative for achieving the low weight and power con­
sumption required for CEC airborne terminal develop­
ment, and APL proceeded to develop an airborne AESA 
concept and associated T/R module requirements. Under 
the technical direction of APL, ITT developed and fabri­
cated 560 T/R modules with then state-of-the-art power-
added efficiency performance. These modules were 
implemented in an airborne CEC AESA that underwent 
successful flight testing in 1994. From this success it was 
apparent that upgrade of passive CEC shipboard arrays 
to AESA technology would provide significant cost, size, 
weight, and reliability benefits. APL subsequently pro­
vided technical direction for the development and field­
ing of shipboard CEC AESAs developed by Raytheon 
during the late 1990s. These efforts proved the overall 
efficacy and reliability of AESA technology for ship­
board use and helped pave 
the way for use of the tech­
nology in shipboard radar 
systems. As MMIC technol­
ogy continued to mature and 
become commoditized, the 
AESA architecture became 
the standard approach for 
advanced radar development 
in the first decade of the 
21st century.
AN/SPY-3 and AN/SPY-4 
Solid-State Radars
Following the results of 
the NATO Anti-Air War­
fare 
System 
(NAAWS) 
study and other studies, 
an X-band AESA-based radar was considered optimal 
for shipboard self-defense (horizon search). The choice 
of X-band frequency provided favorable low-altitude 
propagation characteristics, narrow beamwidth for track 
accuracy, wide operating bandwidth, and the ability to 
support target illumination for guided missile engage­
ments. The AESA architecture offered significantly 
improved radar sensitivity to support threat character­
istics and the track update rates to support the reaction 
times required for ship self-defense. APL participated in 
concept and requirements development and provided 
significant AESA technology expertise to X-band gal­
lium arsenide MMIC and T/R module risk-reduction 
efforts. The Navy initiated development of an X-band 
multifunction radar, designated SPY-3, in 1999, and in 
2003 Raytheon delivered the initial SPY-3 radar to the 
U.S. Navy’s Surface Combat Systems Center at Wallops 
Island, Virginia.
The SPY-3 radar was paired with an S-band solid-
state radar, referred to as the Volume Search Radar and 
designated SPY-4, to form a Dual-Band Radar suite with 
common radar suite control, receiver-exciter, and radar 
signal-processing functions. The SPY-4 AESA, devel­
oped by Lockheed Martin, is shown in Fig. 9. The Dual-
Band Radar suite was originally slated to be installed on 
the DDG  1000 Zumwalt-class destroyer; however, the 
S-band SPY-4 was deleted as a cost-saving measure, and 
the SPY-3 software was subsequently modified to provide 
the volume search functionality. The full Dual-Band 
Radar suite is slated for installation on the first Ford-
class aircraft carrier, CVN 78.
BMD RADAR
During Operation Desert Storm (1991), Iraqi forces 
used ballistic missiles against military and civilian 
targets with sufficient effect to spur the U.S. Navy to 
pursue a BMD capability. Initial studies by APL verified 
Figure 9.  Front and back views of the S-band Volume Search Radar. The back view depicts a com­
monly used architecture for shipboard AESAs in which maintenance access is available for critical 
T/R module and power supply assemblies. (Lockheed Martin Corporation.)


===== PAGE 9 =====
K. W. O’Haver et al.
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
148­
the feasibility of modifying the Aegis Combat System, 
including the AN/SPY-1 radar and Standard Missile-2 
Block  IV, to add an Area BMD endo-atmospheric 
engagement capability to protect ports and forces ashore 
against ballistic missile threats such as the Scud variety 
seen in Desert Storm.
Key AN/SPY-1 advances necessary to support the 
new Area BMD mission included the ability to respond 
to cues from offboard sensors, increased sensitivity, new 
surveillance approaches for early detection of threats, 
new tracking approaches, and new functionality to dis­
criminate ballistic missile warheads. APL worked closely 
in the early to mid-1990s with the Aegis prime contrac­
tor, Lockheed Martin, and the Naval Surface Warfare 
Center Dahlgren Division to incrementally design and 
field-test each of these capabilities. APL continued 
to work closely with the team through the late 1990s 
to implement these new capabilities on top of exist­
ing Aegis missions in the operational Aegis Baseline 6 
phase  III system. APL also worked closely with Lock­
heed Martin to integrate CEC into the Aegis Baseline 6 
phase III Area BMD mission including designs for dis­
tributed weapon coordination and distributed sensor 
coordination—a means to share ballistic missile tracking 
responsibilities among multiple Area BMD ships. APL 
continued to support Baseline 6 phase III development, 
performance analysis, and demonstration test planning 
into early 2000 when the program was canceled.
Roughly in parallel with the development of the Area 
BMD program, the U.S. Navy initiated early develop­
ment of exo-atmospheric intercept capabilities with suc­
cessful Lightweight Exo-Atmospheric Projectile (LEAP) 
demonstrations, first using the Terrier combat system 
(Terrier-LEAP) and later with Aegis (Aegis Leap Inter­
cept). In addition to the new interceptor that became 
Standard Missile-3 (SM-3), the new Navy Theater Wide 
program also included substantial Aegis radar, combat 
system, and weapon system development. Modifications 
to AN/SPY-1 included the implementation of a new 
waveform to enable discrimination capabilities, new 
surveillance approaches, and new tracking algorithms. 
APL provided significant support in the early design and 
analysis of candidate search, association, tracking, and 
discrimination algorithms. APL also served as a critical 
partner with Lockheed Martin and Raytheon in the cer­
tification of the initial Theater BMD capability through 
the Linebacker program in the early 2000s and has con­
tinued in this role through today’s Aegis BMD baselines.
With area and theater-wide BMD development 
efforts ongoing, the U.S. Navy became interested in 
the types of roles they might play in National Missile 
Defense (NMD). In late 1999, a large Navy NMD study 
team was assembled including APL, Navy laboratories 
and warfare centers, and several key federally funded 
research and development centers across the country. 
For this effort, APL led the Concept Formulation Work­
ing Group, which was charged with identifying and 
exploring well-outside-of-the-box approaches to NMD, 
including heavily modified and/or new missile systems, 
launchers, sensors, and ships to provide varying degrees 
of NMD capability, as well as concepts for globally dis­
tributing and coordinating sensor and interceptor capa­
bilities. Many of the basic ideas explored in this early 
Navy NMD study (e.g., forward-based sensors near the 
adversary supporting midcourse interceptors launched 
within or near U.S. territory) align well with the current-
day MDA’s Ballistic Missile Defense System (BMDS).
In late 2002, MDA asked APL to assist in standing 
up a new Sensors and Networking Directorate at MDA 
(MDA/SN). APL worked hand in hand with the early 
MDA/SN leadership to define and staff key technical 
efforts, including the development of requirements for 
a European Midcourse Radar (not programmed) and 
other midcourse sensor options; MDA decided to repur­
pose the THAAD radar (now AN/TPY-2; see Fig. 10) 
as a forward-based standalone sensor supporting the 
BMDS with early detection, tracking, and discrimina­
tion against intercontinental ballistic missiles. APL pro­
vided technical leadership of the government teams for 
systems engineering; tracking and discrimination algo­
rithm development; and command, control, battle man­
agement, and communication (C2BMC) integration. 
The second TPY-2 radar to be built is shown in Fig. 10.
The U.S. Navy PMS 452 (now MDA/AB) requested 
APL leadership in the U.S./Japan Cooperative Develop­
ment Program focused on the co-development of weap­
ons and defense systems capable of serving both the 
Japanese defense of their homeland and U.S. defense 
interests against regional threats. In addition to overall 
leadership of the cooperative development effort, APL 
provided key technical assessments of the capabilities of 
SM-3 future development options. The Lab also assessed 
the abilities of the AN/SPY-1 radar (as part of Aegis 
BMD) and the AN/TPY-2 radar (as part of the BMDS)
to support the joint missions. In parallel with the U.S./
Japan Cooperative Development effort, APL also played 
a critical role in the U.S. government gaining permis­
sion from the government of Japan to host the first 
forward-based AN/TPY-2 radar in Japan for defense of 
the United States against intercontinental ballistic mis­
siles. APL provided technical advice to MDA through­
out this process, provided technical support for direct 
MDA discussions with the Japan Defense Agency as 
well as several ministries of the government of Japan, 
and supported joint site surveys with the Japan Defense 
Forces that led to approval to install the first AN/TPY-2 
forward-based radar overseas at a former Japan Defense 
Forces airbase in Shariki, Aomori Prefecture, Japan.
In 2014, the MDA initiated the Long Range Discrimi­
nation Radar (LRDR) effort to identify and procure a 
new midcourse discrimination capability to supplement 
the existing BMDS. APL led the systems engineering 


===== PAGE 10 =====
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
149­
portion of the sensor trade studies that identified perfor­
mance requirements and siting suitability and developed 
the LRDR element specification. Key characteristics of 
the radar include operation at S-band (~3  GHz), wide 
instantaneous field of view to enable wide-area defense 
against raids, wide instantaneous bandwidth and a large 
suite of discrimination features to support robust mid­
course discrimination, and high sensitivity to provide 
this discrimination capability at the long ranges required.
The choice of S-band for LRDR was a compromise: 
S-band was assessed to provide acceptable performance 
for much lower cost than an X-band (~10 GHz) system at 
the same sensitivity and field of view. Trade study analy­
sis indicated that although discrimination performance 
at X-band would be superior, it was not sufficiently better 
than the performance at S-band to justify the cost dif­
ferential. Another compromise in the frequency band 
trade is the impact of the ionosphere on performance. 
Ionospheric impacts on RF signals roll off sharply with 
increasing frequency, and above L-band (~1 GHz), they 
tend to be negligible in many cases. APL’s early trade 
study analysis suggested that the dispersion and scintil­
lation impacts would still be present at S-band (negli­
gible at X-band), although sufficient means existed to 
mitigate those effects through design and radar opera­
tion choices. APL is continuing work to better under­
stand the dynamic characteristics of the ionosphere and 
the impacts on radar.
In late 2015, the MDA selected Lockheed Martin 
to produce the LRDR system. Their approach heavily 
leverages the hardware design Lockheed Martin devel­
oped during the AMDR technology development (TD) 
phase of that program as well as algorithms and soft­
ware developed for AN/SPY-1 for Aegis BMD and Aegis 
Ashore. With its familiarity with both the Lockheed 
Martin AMDR TD phase hardware and the AN/SPY-1 
algorithms and discrimination functionality, the Lab 
continues to support government oversight of the radar 
development, leveraging existing analysis tools and 
capabilities to assess the LRDR design and performance.
INTEGRATED AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSE RADAR
The AMDR program was initiated in the early 2000s 
to provide the Navy with next-generation air and mis­
sile defense capabilities enabled by state-of-the-art radar 
technologies.
Defining Studies
The AMDR program is the culmination of multiple 
detailed trade studies and technology risk-reduction 
efforts that were aimed at meeting a broad set of radar 
mission demands with an open and scalable architecture. 
During the early phases of the AMDR program, APL 
had lead roles in the development of operational require­
ments and top-level system requirements. APL contin­
ues to provide technical leadership and oversight to 
ensure that AMDR, recently designated the AN/SPY-6, 
provides the planned DDG 51 Flight III destroyers with 
the requisite sensor performance to conduct and sustain 
forward operations in future threat environments.
In 2000, the U.S. Navy established the Surface Navy 
Radar Roadmap, which, among other things, recognized 
the need for increased radar sensitivity beyond the cur­
rent AN/SPY-1 to meet evolving BMD needs, increased 
clutter rejection to address small targets in littoral envi­
ronments, and wide instantaneous bandwidth for BMD 
discrimination. An early digital array radar study identi­
fied a distributed receiver and exciter radar architecture 
and digital beamforming as key enablers of a future radar 
system to meet these needs. A follow-on 2003 gap anal­
ysis defined the capability needs of the Next Genera­
tion Guided Missile Cruiser, called CG(X) at the time, 
and its associated multi-mission radar. The analysis of 
alternatives that followed assessed the cost, schedule, 
and performance of various ship and radar alternatives, 
including different frequency bands and combinations, 
radar sensitivities, and architectural and technology 
solutions. Ultimately the analysis of alternatives con­
cluded that the preferred option for a new radar was a 
large S-band radar sized for simultaneous BMD and area 
air defense coupled with a smaller X-band radar sized for 
self-defense. The recommended radar, though scaled to 
a smaller size, would ultimately become AMDR.
The Radar/Hull Study was a key effort in which 
APL provided technical leadership and guidance to 
the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and the 
Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Devel­
opment, and Acquisition study co-leads. The Radar/
Hull Study compared cost, performance, schedule, and 
future extensibility of AMDR, with digital beamforming 
and an all-new active phased-array design, to a modi­
fied active array AN/SPY-4, with conventional analog 
Figure 10.  AN/TPY-2 radar no. 2, the first forward-based BMDS 
radar in testing at Vandenberg Air Force Base.


===== PAGE 11 =====
K. W. O’Haver et al.
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
150­
beamforming. The radar solutions were compared in dif­
ferent combinations of combat system (Aegis Combat 
System versus Total Ship Computing Environment) and 
ship hulls (DDG 51 versus DDG 1000). The results of 
the Radar/Hull Study led U.S. Navy leadership to con­
clude that a scaled version of AMDR integrated on the 
DDG 51 hull with a future version of the Aegis Combat 
System was the preferred solution. Following senior-
level review of the Radar/Hull Study, and informed by 
the decision to continue the DDG 51 program with pro­
curement of additional Flight IIA ships, the Navy can­
celed the CG(X) program in April 2010 and directed the 
AMDR program to proceed to the next milestone.
With the conclusion of the Radar/Hull Study and 
cancellation of CG(X), the nominal capability and 
configuration of AMDR was established. AMDR is a 
suite of two radars, AMDR-S (S-band) and an X-band 
radar, with a Radar Suite Controller to coordinate the 
activities of the two radars. Per the Radar/Hull Study, 
the AMDR system is slated to be installed on DDG 51 
Flight III destroyers. The high-level operations and roles 
for AMDR are illustrated in Fig. 11.
Technology Risk Reduction
During the early concept and requirements develop­
ment, APL also participated in a variety of technology 
risk-reduction activities. Notable examples are in the 
areas of digital array and gallium nitride power ampli­
fier development. A subsequent Digital Array Radar 
Study identified a distributed receiver and exciter radar 
architecture and digital beamforming as key enablers 
of a future system to meet these needs. APL was a key 
participant in the Digital Array Radar Study, which ini­
tially identified digital beamforming as a key enabling 
technology for AMDR, and has subsequently been at 
the forefront of several digital array radar risk-reduction 
activities. APL engineers served as the technical lead 
for two international digital array radar risk-reduction 
programs that developed and tested experimental digi­
tal arrays: the Advanced Radar Technology Integrated 
System Test-bed program, carried out jointly between 
the governments of the United States and the United 
Kingdom, and the Australian United States Phased 
Array Radar program, carried out jointly between the 
governments of the United States and Australia. High-
power, high-efficiency power amplifier technology 
was recognized early on as a key enabling technology 
for AMDR. APL subject-matter experts supported the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Office 
of Naval Research, and other offices and programs that 
invested heavily in developing gallium nitride power 
amplifier technology.
Kill assessment
support (BMD)
Interceptor
comms
BMD cued
acquisition
Threat
evaluation
BMD
autonomous search
Midcourse track
and discrimination
Electronic protection 
and NCTR
Interceptor 
comms
Kill assessment
support (AAW)
Four-face AAW
volume search
with DBF
Surface search
and track
SUW
Dedicated
track
SPY-6 data passed off-ship via Flight III DDG tactical data links
1
1
AAW
self-defense
AAW
area defense
IAMD
Terminal track
and discrimination
Four-face AAW
horizon search
with DBF
Figure 11.  Operational view of AMDR/AN/SPY-6. AAW, anti-air warfare; DBF, digital beamforming; IAMD, integrated air and missile 
defense; NCTR, noncooperative target recognition; SUW, surface warfare.


===== PAGE 12 =====
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
151­
In the TD phase, the contractors refined system 
concepts to a sufficient level of detail to allow them to 
develop specifications and conduct initial preliminary 
design reviews, all in a competitive environment where 
each contractor was incentivized to thoroughly explore 
the cost/performance trade space. The government sys­
tems engineering team partnered with each contractor 
to ensure that the concepts evolved to fully address Navy 
requirements. The result was a competitive landscape 
at the time the engineering and manufacturing devel­
opment (EMD) request for proposal was released, with 
three relatively mature designs as a basis for proposal. At 
this point, the government team had an unprecedented 
understanding of each of the contractor designs with 
respect to cost and performance and was well positioned 
to ensure the best value in the next phase of develop­
ment. From the early study phases through the TD 
phase, APL provided critical contributions to AMDR 
via leadership roles in system architecture, modeling and 
simulation, software development, physical and electri­
cal ship integration, and testing and evaluation.
In 2014, the AMDR EMD contract was competi­
tively awarded to Raytheon Integrated Defense Systems, 
based in Sudbury, Massachusetts. Coming out of the TD 
phase, the radar hardware design was relatively mature, 
with only a few changes planned to components based 
on the TD phase testing experience. The technologies 
AMDR-S Development
The AMDR program affords a once-in-a-generation 
opportunity to develop the complete replacement for the 
surface Navy’s primary fire control sensor (AN/SPY-1). 
Recognizing this in 2005, the Office of the Chief of 
Naval Operations directed the Above Water Sensors 
Directorate of Program Executive Office Integrated War­
fare Systems (PEO IWS 2.0) to begin the long-lead pro­
cess of generating top-level radar performance (TLRP) 
requirements in preparation for a multiphase acquisition 
program. Given the significant operational demands of 
the integrated air and missile defense mission, coupled 
with the cost and implied technology development needs 
of an advanced maritime radar, PEO IWS 2.0 sponsored 
a multi-organizational government team, for which APL 
provided technical leadership in several areas, to develop 
a government concept architecture. This reference 
architecture was developed in parallel with the TLRP 
in order to underpin and justify the feasibility of the 
requirements being established. Guided by top-level per­
formance needs defined by the Maritime Air and Missile 
Defense of the Joint Forces Analysis of Alternatives and 
Radar/Hull Study, a top-level architecture concept was 
synthesized to provide the level of radar performance 
determined by these past Navy studies. This concept was 
deemed feasible to implement in modern radar hardware 
and software architectures, as guided by subject-matter 
experts from APL and other government laboratories.
The TLRP became the requirements basis for a 
6-month competitive concept studies phase in which 
three U.S. defense prime contractors (Lockheed Martin, 
Northrop Grumman, and Raytheon) each developed 
their own radar architecture and design concepts. This 
concept phase validated the performance goals of the 
TLRP, with changes only in secondary areas of design 
concern; provided feedback to industry in areas where 
their proposed concepts were inconsistent with the 
requirements; identified and solidified the principal 
areas of technology development that would be pursued 
in the subsequent TD phase; and validated that key 
ship constraints (weight/power/cooling/footprint) were 
appropriately addressed in each contractor’s concept.
During a subsequent TD phase, each of the three prime 
contractors were tasked with the following objectives:
• Demonstrate maturity of critical technologies.
• Develop an initial system design to a level sufficient 
to conduct a preliminary design review.
• Conduct a technology demonstration review to pres­
ent test data and analysis of demonstrations.
• Conduct a systems requirements review, system 
functional review, test readiness review, and a pre­
liminary design review.
• Provide a TD prototype.
Figure 12.  AN/SPY-6(V) installed at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile 
Range Facility, Kauai, Hawaii. (Raytheon photo; reproduced with 
permission from Raytheon.)


===== PAGE 13 =====
K. W. O’Haver et al.
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
152­
tional multifunction phased-array radar technology of 
Aegis and concluding with recent technical leadership 
in the development of the Navy’s new AMDR. Through­
out this history, APL has played the roles of innovator, 
technical advisor, and partner with government and 
industry to introduce these capabilities. These accom­
plishments are the result of a dedicated and technically 
diverse staff and an adherence to a systems engineer­
ing process that includes concept development, devel­
opment and application of enabling technology, critical 
experiments, transition to industry producers, rigorous 
testing, and evaluation of effectiveness against continu­
ing evolving threats. This process continues today with 
new radar technology and system and system-of-system 
innovations in development. APL is committed to con­
tinued innovation and application of the systems engi­
neering perspective and practice to ensure future success 
in outpacing rapidly evolving threats.
REFERENCES
  1Gussow, M., and Prettyman, E. C., “Typhon—A System Ahead of its 
Time,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 13(1), 82–89 (1992).
  2Frank, J., Shipley, C. A., Grady, H. M., and Kuck, J., “Latching Ferrite 
Phase Shifter for Phased Arrays,” Microw. J. 10, 97–102 (1967).
  3Frank, J., and O’Haver, K. W., “Phased Array Antenna Development 
at the Applied Physics Laboratory,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 
14(4), 339–347 (1993).
  4Phillips, C. C., “Aegis: Advanced Multi-Function Array Radar,” Johns 
Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 2(4), 246–249 (1981).
  5Irzinski, E. P., “APL Contributions to Aegis,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. 
Dig. 2(4), 250–255 (1981).
  6Rottier, J. R., Rowland, J. R., Konstanzer, G. C., Goldhirsh, J., and 
Dockery, G. D., “APL Environmental Assessment for Naval Anti-Air 
Warfare,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 22(4), 447–461 (2001).
  7Newkirk, M. H., Gehman, J. Z., and Dockery, G. D., “Advances in 
Calculating Electromagnetic Field Propagation Near the Earth’s Sur­
face,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 22(4), 462–472 (2001).
  8Sylvester, J. J., Konstanzer, G. C., Rottier, J. R., Dockery, G. D., and 
Rowland, J. R., “Aegis Anti-Air Warfare Tactical Decision Aids,” 
Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 22(4), 473–487 (2001).
  9Agrawal, A. K., Kopp, B. A., Luesse, M. H., and O’Haver, K. W., 
“Active Phased Array Antenna Development for Modern Shipboard 
Radar Systems,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 22(4), 600–613 (2001).
employed in the design were assessed as being at the 
required technology readiness level of TRL 6.
APL provided oversight and subject-matter expertise 
in the development of the AMDR architecture and the 
associated hardware and software during the AMDR 
TD phase. In the current EMD phase, APL continues 
to provide this type of support for government oversight 
of Raytheon’s agile software development process, algo­
rithms development, modeling and simulation (which 
will be used to sell off many key requirements), cyberse­
curity, and ongoing ship integration analysis and designs. 
The full AN/SPY-6 engineering development model 
array has been delivered to and installed at the Advanced 
Radar Detection Laboratory at the Pacific Missile Range 
Facility in Kauai, Hawaii (Fig. 12). AMDR-S will undergo 
demonstration testing at the Advanced Radar Detection 
Laboratory for all missions during FY2017 before pro­
ceeding to ship and combat system integration. Because 
of the Laboratory’s long, successful history supporting 
Aegis BMD testing, it has several key responsibilities in 
the area of BMD flight testing, including target and mis­
sion requirements development, trajectory evaluation, 
radar cross section prediction and measurement, sce­
nario planning and analysis, configuration management, 
materials science and materials application, target-based 
instrumentation (e.g., imaging sensor payloads) and asso­
ciated ground support equipment, terminal target (mock 
reentry vehicle) prototypes, satellite collision avoidance, 
and post-mission target trajectory reconstruction.
CONCLUSION
Throughout the Laboratory’s history, its engineers 
have played leading roles in developing and evolving 
advanced radar capabilities to counter ever-advancing 
air, cruise missile, and ballistic missile threats. This arti­
cle highlights some major accomplishments, beginning 
with the development and prototyping of the founda­
Kenneth W. O’Haver, Air and Missile 
Defense Sector, Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD
Kenneth O’Haver is a Principal Profes­
sional Staff member and Chief Scientist in 
the Sensor and Communications Branch 
in APL’s Air and Missile Defense Sector. 
He received a B.S. in electrical engineering 
from Virginia Tech and an M.S. in electrical engineering from 
Johns Hopkins University. He has over 30 years of experience 
in the development of advanced radar systems, communica­
tions systems, electronic warfare systems, phased-array anten­
nas, and advanced RF technologies. He has published numer­
ous technical papers and has presented at various conferences. 
His e-mail address is ken.ohaver@jhuapl.edu. 
Christopher K. Barker, Air and Missile 
Defense Sector, Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD
Christopher Barker is a Principal Profes­
sional Staff member and program manager 
in APL’s Air and Missile Defense Sector. 
He received a B.S. in political science 
from the United States Naval Academy 
and served as a commissioned officer and carrier aviator in the 
E-2C Hawkeye community. Since joining APL in 2009, he has 
managed the Air and Missile Defense Radar (AMDR) program 
and other related advanced Surface Navy radar development 
initiatives. In 2014, he and teammates were granted the APL 
Achievement Award for Outstanding Mission Accomplish­
ment for their contributions to AMDR capabilities. His e-mail 
address is christopher.k.barker@jhuapl.edu.


===== PAGE 14 =====
Radar Development for Air and Missile Defense
Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 34, Number 2 (2018), www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest
153­
G. Daniel Dockery, Air and Missile 
Defense Sector, Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD
G. Daniel Dockery is a Principal Profes­
sional Staff member and Supervisor of 
the Sensor and Communication Systems 
Branch in APL’s Air and Missile Defense 
Sector. He received a B.S. in physics and an 
M.S. in electrical engineering, both from Virginia Tech. He 
completed coursework in the University of Maryland’s Ph.D. 
program in electrical engineering. Since joining APL in 1983, 
Dan has worked in the areas of EM propagation and radar 
engineering as well as environmental characterization for U.S. 
Navy radar and communication systems. His e-mail address is 
dan.dockery@jhuapl.edu.
James D. Huffaker, Air and Missile 
Defense Sector, Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD
James Dodd Huffaker is a Principal Profes­
sional Staff member and Assistant Super­
visor of the Sensor and Communication 
Systems Branch in APL’s Air and Missile 
Defense Sector. He received a B.S. and an 
M.S. in electrical engineering, both from Georgia Tech. He has 
30  years’ experience in advanced radar system development, 
analysis, testing, and simulation for the U.S. Navy and Missile 
Defense Agency, primarily focused on AN/TPY-2, Aegis AN/
SPY-1, and AN/SPY-6. His e-mail address is dodd.huffaker@
jhuapl.edu.
