

===== PAGE 1 =====
220 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001)
J.  A.  KRILL 
I
Systems Engineering of Air and Missile Defenses
Jerry A. Krill
n the Air Defense Systems Department, systems engineering is a way of thinking. More 
than a “process,” the systems perspective drives our approach to solving emerging air and 
missile defense problems as the threat becomes more advanced and the tactical environ­
ment more complex. This perspective and the requisite tools have evolved with the increas­
ing complexity of those systems. In this article I describe the systems approach to the devel­
opment of missile defenses and cite recent examples illustrating the associated activities.
THE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING 
PERSPECTIVE
The scientific method, with its methodical and logi­
cal order, has been widely used for centuries. As scien­
tifically developed and engineered devices have evolved 
into complex systems with interacting elements, a sys­
tems engineering approach has arisen that is analogous 
to, and a derivative of, the scientific method. A dia­
gram of the scientific and systems engineering thought 
sequences is shown in Fig. 1.1 The systems perspective 
has been recognized and articulated primarily in the 
latter half of the 20th century, with its greatest impetus 
from World War II. Because the Air Defense Systems 
Department (ADSD) carries forward the APL legacy 
of the development of the proximity fuze from that era 
through evolution to modern guided missile defense, 
the Laboratory’s systems engineering perspective has 
evolved with the emerging national recognition of this 
discipline. In fact, the ADSD mission statement is 
steeped in the context of systems-level thinking to solve 
complex problems.
Before describing how systems engineering is applied 
to air and missile defense, I first briefly describe what 
constitutes a good system and the corresponding sys­
tems engineering perspective and development meth­
odology. A system is considered to be “interrelated 
components functioning together toward a common 
objective.”1 The practice of systems engineering is “an 
interdisciplinary approach toward methodical realiza­
tion of a successful system.” Finally, a successful system 
is one that meets the users’ needs; interfaces with, and 
complements, the operation of related systems; func­
tions over the range of exposed environmental and 
operational conditions; and can be adapted to future 
needs, environments, and interfacing systems.1
Systems engineering is a discipline necessary to pro­
duce a successful system. The logical sequence of generic 
systems engineering steps is shown along with the scien­
tific method in Fig. 1; this is a way of thinking through 
any phase or level of detail during the development. 
The system development cycle uses this methodology, 
from system conception to answering a need through 
system realization. Why is a methodical, interdisciplin­
ary approach needed? A caricature of a missile design as 


===== PAGE 2 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001) 
221
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING OF AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSES
viewed by various specialists1 illustrates the need for a 
multidisciplinary approach (Fig. 2). Clearly, each expert 
has a unique perspective about the system and the rela­
tive importance of his or her special contribution and, 
therefore, about decisions concerning the priority of 
allocations. Systems engineering must bring this exper­
tise together to develop a balanced system where the 
components and technologies are appropriately allo­
cated and cost and risk are contained. Within ADSD 
reside specialists in such fields as control theory, aero­
dynamics, communications, software engineering, and 
microwave and optics theory. There are also combat 
systems engineers who provide analysis and engineering 
contributions to blend these disciplines. Many times, 
specialists choose to evolve their careers toward a total 
systems perspective. Also, many specialists have devel­
oped a keen systems perspective, themselves, from long 
experience. These specialties are included in a number 
of articles in this issue, but they are viewed for their 
contributions to their respective total systems.
Why is an air/missile defense system considered 
complex? Figure 3 depicts air defense elements in a 
battle force. Each element can be considered as an 
interfaced subsystem in a force-wide air defense “super-
system.” Yet each element is, itself, a system. Figure 3 
illustrates both perspectives. The components of the 
combatants interact in a complex manner. For exam­
ple, the Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) 
sensor network allows the computers controlling the 
radars of different ships and aircraft to interact to 
maintain tracking of targets. The Aegis ship’s weap­
ons control computer may use the radar return data of 
the target from another Aegis ship to develop Stan­
dard Missile (SM) midcourse guidance commands. The 
commands are uplinked via the launching ship’s Aegis 
SPY-1 radar to a receiver in the missile for use in its 
guidance computer. Thus, the real-time interaction of 
components among elements of a battle force to sup­
port a missile intercept requires the entire force to be 
treated as a system. The complexity in terms of compo­
nents, functional intricacy, technology blend, and per­
formance stringency to achieve defense against a vari­
ety of threats makes networked air and missile defense 
among the most complex systems in the world. Arti­
cles in this issue further illustrate this point.
How does systems engineering relate to program 
management? Systems engineers and program manag­
ers are partners in the leadership of system development 
teams. Within the Navy’s program offices and program 
mission offices, program managers and systems engineers 
provide programmatic and technical expertise for the 
Figure 1.  Scientific (a) and systems engineering (b) approaches. 
The scientific method of hypothesis posing and testing is analo­
gous to the systems engineering method of system element syn­
thesis and validation.
Figure 2.  Specialists’ whimsical perspectives of a missile system. 
Each specialty might have a different viewpoint about a system 
centered on unique expertise and technology. A systems engi­
neer must perform from a balanced perspective, giving appropri­
ate attention to each specialty, often in conflict with one another 
for resources and requirements satisfaction.
Define
problem
Functional
analysis
Physical analysis/
allocation
Evaluation and
decision
Conclude
(confirm, deny, or
modify hypothesis)
Test
hypothesis
Select
hypothesis
Problem
definition
Problem
Next
problem
Need
Solution(s)
Requirements
Functions
Potential
solutions
(a)
(b)


===== PAGE 3 =====
222 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001)
J.  A.  KRILL 
development teams. In ADSD we mirror this arrange­
ment with a matrix organization that provides program 
and project managers from the programs office and engi­
neering teams from the technical groups. 
Increasingly, chief, systems, and lead engineers are 
being formally designated, primarily from the technical 
groups, to complement the program and project man­
agers in leadership of systems engineering tasks. The 
chief/lead systems engineers and program/project man­
agers work in partnership, in addition to leading the 
engineering team, to ensure that development is orderly 
and timely and that sufficient resources are provided. 
As team co-leads, their functions must overlap some­
what so that each recognizes and tends to the needs and 
resources of the other while they perform their primary 
roles. As team partners, for example, the systems engi­
neer may develop the technical performance require­
ments and specifications and lead system modeling and 
critical experiments to validate the requirements. The 
program manager provides the programmatic context 
for these requirements in the key program documents 
and articulates the underlying programmatic required 
resources and schedule to achieve them, including the 
funding, equipment, and facilities for modeling and 
experiment validations. Some overlap in their roles can 
occur. For instance, the program manager may have an 
effect on the technical requirements because of a short 
schedule or funding constraints. The systems engineer 
can have an effect on funding and scheduling by articu­
lating and providing evidence of key technical risks that 
must first be resolved by prototyping or experiments.
Figure 4 illustrates the system development cycle 
using the Navy Theater Wide (NTW) Tactical Bal­
listic Missile Defense System as an example. APL was 
recently designated the Technical Direction Agent for 
this system, i.e., APL has been given the responsibility 
Figure 3.  A networked missile defense system is actually a system of systems, with several major systems interfaced as subsystems 
of a larger force-level system. Shown are an SM, an Aegis ship combat system that guides the SM to its target, an E-2C airborne early 
warning system that first detects the target and reports via tactical links and the Cooperative Engagement Capability, and amphibious 
assault ships with the elements of the Ship Self-Defense System in Mark I and Mark II versions featuring integrated NATO Sea Sparrow 
and Rolling Airframe Missile engagements.
SM
Aegis ship
E-2C
Amphibious
assault
ships


===== PAGE 4 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001) 
223
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING OF AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSES
of technical oversight for the success of the system and 
its upgrade evolution. NTW is developed as a system 
even though it is part of the more encompassing ship 
combat system and battle force defense network. Part 
of the missile defense systems engineering challenge is 
to develop such elements while ensuring the ship and 
force-level system perspectives.
I will briefly discuss the phases of systems engineer­
ing from Fig. 4 as a means of introducing the remain­
ing sections of this article. We begin with the need. 
Often one or more concepts are explored to deter­
mine how to articulate the need. Although the mis­
sion need is not specific to the design approach, it may 
be necessary to convey the need for such conceptual 
elements as communication or sensing. Operational 
requirements are introduced in the context of required 
functions, critical parameters, and effectiveness mea­
sures. This generally requires system-level modeling 
and exploration of the concept in more detail, as well 
as critical experiments, component developments, or 
data collections to define and validate the require­
ments. Conceptual alternatives are assessed to select 
the preferred approach, and the system requirements, 
traced to the operational requirements, are developed 
as the primary basis for the system design.
Figure 4.  A system development cycle for NTW Tactical Ballistic Missile Defense. The cycle shows systems engineering progression from 
top-level requirements through concept formulation and assessments; risk reduction activities; development, including design trade-offs, 
modeling, and fabrication; system element validation and integration; the series of testing leading to a full-scale missile intercept test; and, 
finally, Fleet introduction, life-cycle support, and upgrade.
The system concept and concept of operations form 
the basis, along with modeling and simulation and risk 
reduction activities, for partitioning and allocating the 
system functions and performance to successively greater 
levels of detail. Iteration and feedback are critical to 
this methodology because at some level of detail a func­
tion may prove infeasible as defined, thus requiring a 
modification at higher levels to reallocate requirements 
and functionality. Modeling and simulation can be per­
formed at the various levels of detail required to verify 
the viability of performance allocations (timing and 
accuracy budgets and gain margins) for radars and mis­
sile guidance in various physical environments; even an 
entire battle force air defense network can be modeled. 
Later in this article, I discuss other uses and forms of 
simulations and models. 
ADSD develops and applies models at all levels, 
many of which have become the Navy standard for 
their validated accuracy. Prototyping of portions of the 
system is generally needed to validate that the required 
performance can be achieved or to validate portions of 
the more detailed requirements that have been derived 
from the primary ones. When the partitioning has 
reached the component level (and has passed a series 
of design reviews), the components can be engineered, 


===== PAGE 5 =====
224 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001)
J.  A.  KRILL 
fabricated, and tested. Then the bottom-up process of 
successively integrating and testing components com­
mences in reverse order from the top-down requirements 
partitioning process. The fabricated components are 
integrated and tested against predicted performance at 
the corresponding requirements allocation level, build­
ing into subsystems and, finally, the total system. Like­
wise, testing begins at component integration and builds 
toward full system-level testing by the intended users, 
i.e., the Fleet operators, to evaluate achievement of the 
operational requirements in the representative envi­
ronments. Systems engineering includes system main­
tenance and support, as well as planned capability 
upgrades and modernization throughout the life of the 
system; these aspects are receiving greater attention as 
total system life cost is given increasing emphasis.
ADSD has been involved in all phases of systems 
development. The phases are next described in greater 
detail, and various examples are provided.
ARTICULATING THE NEED AND 
DEFINING REQUIREMENTS
A mission need is defined through a continuous 
assessment of current and proposed capabilities against 
an evolving threat. It is the basis for establishing a new 
operational capability, improving an existing capabil­
ity, or exploiting an opportunity. A mission need state­
ment is very broad and not system specific.1 For DoD 
systems, this mission need is documented in a Mission 
Needs Statement.2 As part of that document, a con­
vincing case must be made that the need can feasibly be 
met by existing or demonstrable technology.
After the need is identified, critical operational 
requirements must be developed. These generally are 
in some context of the expected technical approaches’ 
fundamental properties so that meaningful critical func­
tions and performance parameters can be defined. For 
example, it would likely be understood (based on model­
ing, experimentation, or leveraging of existing systems) 
whether a new system may require a new sensor or com­
munications element. As a result, a radar or commu­
nication range may become a key performance param­
eter in an Operational Requirements Document.2 This 
may be nearly coincident with an analysis of alterna­
tives (AoA)3 from which an initial larger set of concept 
candidates is reduced to a small set of preferred cases. 
Critical experiments and prototype tests may also be 
required to validate the requirements and the feasibil­
ity of the concepts. Operational requirements, there­
fore, are based on alternatives assessments, feasibility 
experiments, and other means of concept exploration. 
They include threshold (minimum required) and objec­
tive (desired upper bound) key performance parameter 
values and performance and effectiveness measures. 
Both technical and operational (user) requirements are 
provided. It is important that these threshold and objec­
tive values be measurable by analysis or tests. ADSD 
has played a key role in providing technical support 
for a number of major system Operational Require­
ments Documents, including those for CEC, SM, Area 
Air Defense Command, NTW Tactical Ballistic Missile 
Defense, and the Ship Self-Defense System (SSDS).
DEVELOPING SYSTEM CONCEPTS 
AND ASSESSING ALTERNATIVES
The previous section indicated the importance of 
system concepts and alternatives assessments as a basis 
for defining needs and requirements. In this section I 
further define what a concept consists of and how it is 
assessed. A concept is generally known as a set of the 
following descriptive items:
• A concept of operations description (its use)
• A description of the system functional architecture 
in terms of top-level block diagrams of functions 
and elements with corresponding interfaces between 
them
• High-level models, e.g., equations or algorithms
• Text descriptions of the block diagram items
• Discussions of critical data, technologies, risk areas, 
and cost factors
With this level of completeness, alternative concepts 
can be evaluated against each other in the context of 
a Design Reference Mission (DRM), which describes 
the threat, geopolitical, and natural operational envi­
ronments in which the system is expected to perform.4 
The concepts are defined in sufficient detail for top-
level performance modeling to reflect expected tech-
nical capabilities and cost factors. These are then 
compared according to weighted criteria to identify 
potential “best” candidates.
Figure 5 is an example of model development and 
AoA concepts for the NTW defense missile, the SM-3. 
The initial assessment concluded that a missile derived 
from prior SM‑2 components with prototype kinetic 
kill technology and with substantial intercept range for 
inland protection was the best approach, having scored 
the highest for the rating criteria. It was assumed, on the 
basis of critical studies and experiments, that an evolved 
version of the Aegis Combat System would guide the 
SM-3. Further definition of the NTW System from the 
AoA results used more detailed models and the DRM 
scenarios to evaluate such critical features as missile 
boost velocity, the ability of the Aegis SPY-1B phased 
array radar to discriminate warheads from debris, and 
countermeasures versus modification options. Figure 6 
illustrates the features of the NTW DRM. This DRM, 
developed by APL’s Joint Warfare Analysis Department 
(JWAD) in partnership with ADSD, is necessarily of 
sufficient detail to allow comprehensive modeling and 


===== PAGE 6 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001) 
225
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING OF AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSES
activities as well as from results 
of maturing technology and system 
studies. Figure 7 is an early illustra­
tion of the SM concept of standard­
ization featuring common compo­
nents in missiles used in the Aegis 
and the Terrier/Tartar weapon sys­
tems of the 1970s. Such standardiza­
tion provided a major life-cycle cost 
saving and performance similarity 
across the Fleet. It formed a basis 
for system functional requirements 
and performance requirement allo­
cations to subsystems, risk assess­
ments, and trade-off studies, as dis­
cussed later. With the retirement 
of Terrier and Tartar ships, leaving 
Aegis as the only area defense 
system, standardization evolved to 
the use of modularity in block 
upgrades to meet advancing threat 
capabilities.
In the past decade, with Aegis as 
the only U.S. weapon system using 
SM-2, standardization has been a 
primary means of containing cost 
and risk in block upgrades to more 
advanced versions or even as the 
basis for introducing a new mission 
capability. In the former case, a high degree of common­
ality exists among the latest block upgrades—III, IIIA, 
IIIB, and IV—allowing relatively rapid and cost-effec­
tive means to address advancing threats. More recently, 
commonality of the SM series has expedited the devel­
opment of new Navy missions with the SM-2 Block 
IVA for Area Tactical Ballistic Missile Defense and 
the SM-3 for Theater Tactical Ballistic Missile Defense. 
Standard components even allow timely development 
of a land attack version known as SM-4. 
PERFORMING CRITICAL RISK 
REDUCTION ACTIVITIES
Because new systems, or major system upgrades, rep­
resent a new capability, there are always unknowns in 
the implementation of the concepts. A set of activities 
is required for risk reduction to resolve the unknowns 
by determining feasibility, identifying new phenomena, 
developing or maturing new types of components and 
technologies, and learning about new operating param­
eter regimes. The purpose of risk reduction, then, is to 
resolve such issues in advance. Such activities include 
the following:
• Collecting data on critical phenomena not fully 
understood
Figure 6.  The NTW System will be capable of intercepting longer-range, theater-class, 
tactical ballistic missiles. To ensure that the analyses and trade-off studies from the devel­
opment team (from multiple laboratory and industrial organizations) would be consistent, 
a DRM was developed. Shown is an example operational situation with Joint missile 
defenses arrayed against tactical ballistic missiles fired from multiple directions and at dif­
ferent times. A variety of conditions are defined that serve as a basis for modeling system 
element performance versus design allocation alternatives. (BMC4I = battle management 
command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence.)
Threat
characterization
Threat
tactics
Physical
environment
BMC4I
Threat Ballistic
Missile trajectories
Blue
Force
locations
Joint campaign
context
Figure 5.  APL played a key role in an assessment of alternative 
NTW missile conceptual configurations. Of the alternatives shown, 
the SM LEAP derivative with a kinetic kill capability was deter­
mined to be the best approach in terms of cost, risk, capability, 
and schedule. This alternative was the basis for SM-3.
analysis of NTW System elements. Recent work spon­
sored by the Navy has resulted in a family of DRMs for 
various programs that are mutually consistent and part 
of a “Master DRM.”
A system concept is developed from the described 
SM-2 Block IVA
SM LEAP
Marinized THAAD
Boosted THAAD
New missile


===== PAGE 7 =====
226 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001)
J.  A.  KRILL 
• Building prototypes of critical components, elements, 
and/or technologies
• Determining alternative work-around technologies 
or elements should the risk items fail or become 
delayed
• Performing appropriate development tests/critical 
experiments to verify feasibility and performance in 
expected environments
A critical risk item for SM-2 Block IVA was an infra­
red window for the seeker terminal homing detector/
imager. The window had to maintain sufficient transpar­
ency, low distortion, and detector protection in severe 
flight heating, vibration, and acceleration environments. 
A set of materials was theoretically identified and exper­
imentally tested, and sapphire was selected. Upon crit­
ical prototype fabrication and wind tunnel testing, a 
number of seemingly random failures occurred. A more 
detailed theoretical model revealed that the orientation of 
the sapphire crystal lattice was important; while one 
orientation met requirements, others did not. This effort 
was a collaboration with APL’s Research and Technol­
ogy Development Center.
Numerous examples can be cited for CEC as well, 
including fade margin tests and prototype transmitter 
and antenna components for the CEC data distribution 
function and radar data collections for playback into pro­
totype algorithms for the composite tracking function.
In 1996 an advanced concept technology demon­
stration (ACTD) was conducted in Hawaii in which 
APL was the laboratory co-lead with the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology/Lincoln Laboratory. The dem­
onstration featured the use of CEC to enable an Aegis 
cruiser to fire a modified SM‑2 Block IIIA to engage a 
target beyond the ship’s horizon for the first time using 
an elevated terminal homing target illumination (on a 
mountain to represent a potential future aircraft illu­
mination capability). The missile engagement terminal 
homing was in a range, approach angle, and altitude 
regime not previously considered in missile design. 
Theoretical modeling indicated the need for a more 
frequency-selective illumination reference receiver 
Figure 7.  An early SM concept illustration. In the late 1960s and early 1970s evaluations of technologies, costs, and performance require­
ments led to a system concept definition of standardized area defense missiles.


===== PAGE 8 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001) 
227
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING OF AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSES
Threat
trajectory
Interceptor
TOF
uncertainty
Interceptor miss distance
table
•Threat type
•Threat maneuver levels
  and maneuver frequency
•Closing velocity
•Intercept altitude
•KW velocity
Peels workbench
Interceptor lethality
•Warhead type
•Closing velocity
•Strike angle
•Miss distance
•KW aspect angles
Threat description
•Major object parameters
•6-DOF threat trajectory
•Pointing vector
•Acceleration
•Radar cross section
TBM heating analysis
    •OSC-18
IR acquisition table
 •Threat
 •Time and aspect
Interceptor seeker
sensitivity
Interceptor configuration
KKV descriptive parameters
Interceptor EOB conditions
Engagement constraints
Aegis WCS description
•Detection range
•Angular accuracy
•Update periods
•Related track accuracy
  parameters
Post-processing
software suite
APL Defended
Area Model (ADAM)
Launch window
requirements
Interceptor divert table
•Tgo
•Threat maneuver level
•KKV velocity
•Intercept altitude
Interceptor
terminal simulation
Interceptor
lethality
computation
Warhead
description
KW
description
Intercept
conditions
Threat
description
KW
description
Intercept space
Operating area
Defended region
An example is the APL Defended Area Model 
(ADAM) widely used in the NTW Tactical Ballistic 
Missile Defense Program to explore combinations of 
radar range and SM‑3 configurations against a variety 
of targets. Figure 8 illustrates the model elements of 
ADAM and examples of its output, indicating the area 
within which a ship could operate and defend a loca­
tion from a threat direction. The model’s ADAM com­
ponents are a federation of APL and Navy models, 
and ADAM’s development and use are a collabora-
tion between the ADSD and  APL’s Strategic Systems 
Department. A new, more detailed, and comprehensive 
simulation called ARTEMIS is being developed as an 
Figure 8.  The ADAM allows a wide variety of tactical ballistic missile defense concepts to be evaluated. It includes linked models of 
sensors, the intercepting missile, command and control features, and kinetic kill vehicle (KKV) homing. Workbench post-processing tools 
provide visual analysis products (yellow). The blue boxes identify ADAM and associated APL and DoD community models. The clear 
boxes indicate input and intermediate data. (6-DOF = 6-degree-of-freedom, EOB = enemy order of battle, KW = kinetic warhead, TBM = 
tactical ballistic missile, Tgo = time to go, TOF = time-of-flight, WCS = Weapons Control System.)
modification to the missile. However, to reduce the risk 
of failure in this new over-the-horizon regime, a “cap­
tive carry” critical experiment was performed. This cap­
tive carry experiment prior to the Mountain Top ACTD 
(described later) consisted of a missile seeker attached to 
the wing of a Lear jet to fly portions of the missile trajec­
tory and verify midcourse guidance handoff to terminal 
homing and seeker lock on to the target. This successful 
risk reduction critical experiment is described in Ref. 5.
USING MODELING AND SIMULATION
Modeling and simulation are key to all phases of 
the systems development cycle. In general, a model is 
a simplified representation of a system or system ele­
ment or feature. Examples of models are equations, scale 
models and mockups, and logic flows; some of these can 
be implemented into computer programs. Simulations 
generally consist of linked collections of models in the 
context of a time sequence.


===== PAGE 9 =====
228 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001)
J.  A.  KRILL 
Figure 9.  Key elements of a virtual demonstration in the APL Warfare Analysis Laboratory. Shown are the conceptual elements of the 
OCMD concept featuring (a) a CEC “forward pass” cooperative engagement with advanced E-2C detection and tracking of a target, an 
Aegis ship-launched advanced SM guided from an airborne fire control suite via CEC and Aegis weapon control, terminally illuminated 
from the fire control aircraft; (b) a depiction of the high-fidelity models from multiple organizations incorporated to simulate the conceptual 
system; and (c) an illustration of simulated cruise missile attacks against South Korea for engagement analysis.
integration of validated detailed models of the entire 
SM kill chain from target detection through intercept. 
Models validated by test results can also serve as virtual 
test vehicles for regions of the performance envelope 
where actual tests cannot be safely or cost-effectively 
conducted.
Models and simulations can be used to predict per­
formance and conduct trade-off studies. Trade-off stud­
ies investigate technical approaches to meeting require­
ments at each level of design detail. Modeling cannot 
be a substitute for real-world testing, as models reflect 
only a simplified version of the system and its opera­
tion and do not fully represent the actual system in 
its operational environment. There must be a balance 
between modeling and simulation (since one cannot 
test for every condition) and testing (since realistic vali­
dation is required and expected).
Figure 9 is an illustration of a collection of models 
linked into a simulation of Overland Cruise Missile 
Defense (OCMD). One concept of CEC is a form of 
cooperative engagement known as “forward pass” in 
which a ship-launched missile flies beyond the ship’s 
horizon to intercept a target tracked by an airborne 
radar and guided by data from the airborne radar. A 
(a)
(c)
(b)
successful ACTD of forward pass occurred in 1996,5 using 
prototype and ship elements on a mountain in Hawaii to 
represent potential lightweight airborne sensors and fire 
control elements. The success of the ACTD, known as 
Mountain Top (referred to earlier), led to further inter­
est in defining the advanced elements of such a system 
for defense of Allied assets far inland. The system con­
cept consisted of airborne detection, tracking sufficiently 
accurate to support missile guidance, and modified ver­
sions of SM, CEC, and Aegis to enable a forward-pass 
handover of missile guidance from the ship to the air­
craft. A virtual follow-on test was performed in JWAD’s 
Warfare Analysis Laboratory6 using the simulation of the 
system network, as shown in Fig. 9c, in the context of 
a DRM-like scenario over South Korea. The results con­
firmed and illuminated requirements and corresponding 
performance for the OCMD capability that could be fur­
ther developed. They also enabled identification of such 
issues as determining the appropriate locations of the air­
borne radar and ship as well as the timing of missile inter­
cepts to minimize terrain blockage.
PROTOTYPING WITH INDUSTRIAL 
DESIGN AND MANUFACTURING 
AGENTS
ADSD’s role in system development generally goes 
through a transition to one of support to an industrial 
agent in the detailed design, fabrication, and integra­
tion phases. This support is often in the form of pro­
totyping to determine the feasibility or to reduce the 


===== PAGE 10 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001) 
229
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING OF AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSES
risk of a critical component or unproven technology. 
For such prototyping ADSD generally provides tech­
nical guidance to suppliers of the new technology or 
components. Prototyping has been a key service to the 
Navy in risk management, feasibility demonstration, 
and maturing new technology.
ADSD also supports the system development phase 
of design and fabrication by our involvement in detailed 
design reviews and software walk-throughs. A design 
requires definition of all aspects of a system or prototype 
of system elements down to the component level. Suffi­
cient documentation and engineering guidance must be 
available to fabricate such components so that they can 
be interconnected during integration in a fully consis­
tent and matched manner. ADSD helps to ensure that 
contractors’ designs meet these standards.
An example of prototyping and component design 
is the CEC Data Distribution System in the late 1980s 
in which a new transmitter was required at a frequency 
and waveform regime that did not exist in available 
(late 1980s) components. In partnership with the prime 
contractor, E-Systems, St. Petersburg (now Raytheon), 
ADSD developed a prototype transmitter subsystem with 
special control features and qualified a transmitter tube 
vendor under a competitive effort. E-Systems’ participa­
tion during the APL-led prototyping, in turn, led to their 
successfully developing, in a short time, an improved 
engineering and manufacturing model of the transmitter 
that fully met requirements. Somewhat later, APL led 
the development of solid-state transmit/receive modules 
for an airborne transmitter/antenna configuration.
USING STIMULATORS FOR SYSTEM 
INTEGRATION
Just as a design involves decomposition of require­
ments into allocated elements in a top-down fashion, 
assembly and integration generally involve a bottom-up 
approach to successively more complex build-up and 
test of components into subsystems and, finally, the total 
system.1 When certain system elements are not ready 
for integration, testing can proceed by using so-called 
“stimulators” in their place, which replicate the inputs 
and outputs of the missing elements. Two of the best 
known such stimulators, or element-in-the-loop config­
urations, are the ADSD-developed wraparound simula­
tion programs (WASPs) for CEC and SSDS and the 
SM Guidance System Evaluation Laboratory (GSEL).
The WASP approach was originally developed for the 
Terrier/Tartar air defense systems as a means to ensure 
that subsystems being developed separately by different 
organizations would be tested early via WASP interfaces 
to reduce the risk that the subsystems would not cor­
rectly interface. The approach was recognized as nec­
essary for CEC integration testing because the CEC 
subsystems are developed by different teams, and the 
Cooperative Engagement Processor subsystem interfaces 
to different combat systems developed by different com­
panies. A controlled and consistent method was required 
to pre-test the interfaces before the costly phase of subsys­
tem and combat system integration testing commenced.
The GSEL (Fig. 10) allows the most critical element 
of the missile, the guidance system (including the seeker 
subsystems), to be tested in a simulated environment 
that includes the threat target and the guidance interface 
to the combat system. This guidance system-in-the-loop 
test has proven critical to successful missile integration 
as well as to reconstruction of unexpected results of full-
scale missile firing tests for analysis.
For example, the GSEL was recently instrumental in 
the success of a critical SM-3 test. Confirmation of the 
test objectives and configuration was followed by the 
discovery of a software flaw that could have resulted in 
test failure. The GSEL allows an unprecedented level 
of test preparation thoroughness when coupled with the 
validated APL models and the expertise of the staff.
PERFORMING TEST AND 
EVALUATION ACTIVITIES
ADSD has been intensely involved in all forms of 
test and evaluation (T&E), including scientific exper­
iments, critical subsystem experiments, prototype ele­
ment tests, Fleet data collections and exercises, inte­
gration tests, test facility operations, flight tests, and 
full-scale battle force technical and operational evalua­
tions. The legacy is a continuous thread extending from 
the proximity fuze era and has been much of the basis 
for valuable hands-on experience and understanding of 
Fleet operations by the ADSD staff. The design of test 
approaches and the embedding of data collection and 
measurement points in a system start at the beginning 
of the development cycle, and test execution can span 
the entire cycle, including critical risk reduction exper­
iments. T&E become predominant as an independent 
activity (from the developers) toward the end of the 
integration testing and throughout the formal system-
level tests.
System-level T&E serves the following purposes1:
• Ensuring correct operation in the intended user envi­
ronment
• Protecting a major system investment by testing early 
and providing test points for extraction of measure­
ment data that can be examined from the earliest 
stages of integration
• Gaining confidence and reducing risk of failure by 
critical prototype and data collection tests
• Demonstrating the readiness to proceed to the next 
phase of development or testing
The design of a major test is a complex systems engi­
neering undertaking and mirrors the system development 


===== PAGE 11 =====
230 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001)
J.  A.  KRILL 
Figure 10.  The interior of the GSEL in Building 1. The seeker section of an SM round is mounted and integrated in an anechoic chamber 
so that the seeker receives simulated guidance commands from computers and specialized interface instruments and its sensor observes 
simulated microwave or infrared target signatures in the chamber. This hardware-in-the-loop approach has long been a key element in 
successful SM block upgrade developments.
cycle illustrated in Fig. 4. The test assets representing the 
threat and operational environment must be specified 
to simulate the threat and environment defined in the 
operational requirements. The scenarios must be consis­
tent with the DRM in representing the expected user 
operation and must provide for relevant performance 
and effectiveness measures. The spectrum of test sce­
narios must cover the required operational parameters 
and conditions. The design of scenarios, including test 
range safety constraints, generally requires detailed mod­
eling and simulation to ensure that the expected results 
are valid and that the safety margins are sufficient. The 
assumptions and inputs to these models can provide 
insights into instrumentation and test controls as well as 
their limitations.
Major tests must be thoroughly organized and con­
trolled. Early in system developments ADSD often par­
ticipates in many of the main test roles, except those 
of government oversight. Test success requires rigor and 
thoroughness. In the Mountain Top ACTD described 
earlier, since an over-the-horizon engagement had never 
been attempted, an extensive data collection and pre-
test experiment series was conducted on every element 
of the system. As mentioned, even the modified missile 
seeker was flown against the drone target, mounted on a 
Lear jet, to ensure that sea-surface reflections had been 
properly modeled and accommodated in the design of 
the SM rear reference receiver. Virtually every means of 
testing of every element had been exercised and mod­
eled, other than running the test itself. The very first 
RF/IR flight environment
IR target generator
RF guidance section
RF/IR guidance section
IR seeker


===== PAGE 12 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001) 
231
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING OF AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSES
over-the-horizon engagement resulted in a direct hit as 
a consequence of systems engineering and correspond­
ing test rigor.5
PLANNING FOR SYSTEM EVOLUTION 
AND THE LIFE CYCLE
The system development cycle and associated activi­
ties described earlier are applicable at several stages in 
the life of a system. A typical system development pro­
gram goes through several phases. During the conceptual 
phase, prototyping of some or most of a system may be 
required to demonstrate feasibility and potential. That 
was the case for CEC as a new type of system for which 
there were no precedents. The system development cycle 
was exercised for the CEC prototype, albeit with tailor­
ing and abbreviation of some of the activities.
The next phase is generally the development of a 
version of the system that, as a goal, meets the pre­
scribed environmental requirements and is designed to 
facilitate manufacturing in a production line. This ver­
sion often has some limit in functionality, for example, 
to constrain costs on low-risk features at this stage or to 
demonstrate partial capability before a more complete 
and sophisticated version of the capability is attempted. 
This engineering and manufacturing development pro­
totype is more extensively tested against both techni­
cal and operational requirements. In many programs 
it is determined that certain capabilities and perfor­
mance are not needed during initial operation and that 
a number of preplanned improvements should be incor­
porated as a baseline upgrade program. Other reasons for 
a baseline upgrade would be to extend the service life of 
a system by introducing new characteristics to keep pace 
with an evolving threat. For example, Aegis has under­
gone six baseline introductions since its Initial Opera­
tional Capability in 1983, and SM-2 is introducing a 
Block IV. Often the capabilities of later baselines are 
far advanced over the initial version. In each baseline 
upgrade, a portion of the basic development cycle is 
exercised.
ADSD has been involved in determining required 
capabilities for baseline upgrades of most Navy air and 
missile defense systems. SSDS is entering its second 
block, and CEC is entering Baseline 2. For some pro­
grams, such as SM, major changes in technology, perfor­
mance, and system functions may be made, with lesser 
changes for adaptation to specific combat systems. Such 
changes are identified by letters after the block numbers, 
e.g., IIIA and IIIB. For systems such as CEC, upgrades to 
software algorithms or subsystem cost reductions, such 
as array redesigns, are generally featured.
Technology refresh is a significant activity for 
system evolution. For example, commercial off-the-shelf 
(COTS) processor cards are used in CEC. These are 
replaced with newer versions as those versions replace 
older forms on the commercial market. APL has played 
a key role in designing the system to readily accommo­
date new COTS products. A transparent software ser­
vice layer between the applications modules and the 
COTS processor network was developed to facilitate 
COTS refresh.
In APL’s earlier versions of CEC and SSDS we pio­
neered the use of COTS. We found that, in return for 
supporting the commercial vendors in their beta testing 
and debugging of new products while we benchmarked 
the capabilities of candidate products in parallel, the 
commercial companies were willing to add features to 
their products that would benefit the Navy systems (even 
though the Navy is a small client compared to the com­
mercial market). Thus, our involvement influenced the 
commercial product. More recently, we have pioneered 
the introduction of commercial, solid-state, microwave 
module technology into the CEC phased array antennas 
as a cost-reduction measure. We have also begun a collab­
orative effort with Raytheon and the National Security 
Agency to develop anti-tamper protection of the COTS 
processor and COTS-based software for CEC. APL is 
prototyping modified COTS processor components and 
protective software and software load features. These will 
serve as a design basis for the next Raytheon production 
version. These activities have, over the years, relied on 
the technology and manufacturing base of APL’s Techni­
cal Services Department.
ADSD, with JWAD, has performed life-cycle cost 
and reliability analyses at the beginning of new system 
efforts or baseline upgrades. These are used not only 
as part of AoA concept selection but also to specify 
reliability and life-cycle costs and, in some cases, to 
determine design approaches for rapid repair or backup 
channels to maintain operations during battle. These 
analyses are also sometimes the basis for determining 
the number of spares required.
FUTURE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING 
CHALLENGES 
The Navy has established authoritative systems engi­
neering activities to ensure proper system integration 
of a battle force and all the missions of that force, of 
which air and missile defense is only one. The principal 
agencies at present include NAVSEA SEA‑053 and 
the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for 
Research, Development, and Acquisition Chief Engi­
neer. We have determined that the fundamental sys­
tems engineering perspective, approach, and activities 
are effective and even more necessary as air and missile 
defense systems become more sophisticated. We believe, 
however, that new tools are required to make the systems 


===== PAGE 13 =====
232 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001)
J.  A.  KRILL 
Figure 11.  Computer illustration of the new System Concept Development Laboratory 
featuring (a) an electronic library, (b) a “war room,” (c) a visualization laboratory, (d) a force 
modeling laboratory (with JWAD), and (e) a test participation facility. The laboratory com­
plex is interconnected with other APL laboratories and, via satellite links, to Navy Fleet 
elements. It is also designed to interface with the merging distributed engineering plant 
networking being developed within the DoD.
engineering practices more effective 
for large-scale systems. The trend is 
that greater force automation can 
lead to greater interaction among 
the computers and links of combat­
ants, and interoperability becomes 
at once more important and more 
difficult to attain and maintain. 
ADSD had anticipated this need in 
the design of the new Building 26, 
which houses the System Concept 
Development Laboratory.
The following new tools are being 
developed for the described activ­
ities and the features that enable 
them in the System Concept Devel­
opment Laboratory (Fig. 11):
• Automated visualization of large-
scale system diagrams for an 
entire battle force with database 
linkages to associated require­
ments, specifications, models, 
program offices, design agents, 
and system equipment and com­
puter programs
• The ability of this visualization 
to identify inconsistencies, gaps, 
and shortfalls
• Development of WASPs for 
remote, networked testing at the 
development sites and for linkage 
to systems at different combat 
system sites to test elements for 
compatibility and interoperabil­
ity at the earliest stages of devel­
opment and integration
• Collaborative specification, de-
sign, test, and simulation and 
experimentation via automated, 
networked laboratories, facilities, 
and test sites
CONCLUSION
We see that the systems engi­
neering perspective and practices 
are key to the past and future 
success and accomplishments of 
ADSD. Trends call for an increased 
need for rigor, methodical steps, an environment in which critical ques­
tions are welcomed, and a process that is open to inspection. New 
tools are required to ensure that the growing numbers of parameters and 
conditions can be considered and tracked. With the reduction in the 
number of experienced engineering staff in military industries and services, 
the growth of system complexity, and a diminishing tolerance for 
failure, the long-standing systems engineering tradition and culture of 
ADSD will be increasingly important in next-generation air and missile 
defense systems.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
  1Kossiakoff, A., and Sweet, W. N., “System Engineering Principles and Practices: A Guide to the 
Engineering of Complete Systems,” JHU course text.
  2“The Cooperative Engagement Capability,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 16(4), 377–396 
(1995).
  3Defense Acquisition System, DoD 5000.1.
  4Skolnick, F. R., and Wilkins, P. G., “Laying the Foundation for Successful Systems Engineer­
ing,” Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 21(2), 208–216 (2000).
  5Zinger, W. H., and Krill, J. A., “Mountain Top: Beyond-the-Horizon Cruise Missile Defense,” 
Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Dig. 18(4), 501–520 (1997).
  6Kauderer, H. T., “Air-Directed Surface-to-Air Missile Study Methodology,” Johns Hopkins APL 
Tech. Dig. 21(2), 244–250 (2000).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)


===== PAGE 14 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 22, NUMBER 3 (2001) 
233
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING OF AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSES
THE AUTHOR
JERRY A. KRILL received a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the University 
of Maryland in 1978. He joined APL in 1973 and is a member of the Principal 
Professional Staff. He was recently appointed Head of the Power Projection Sys­
tems Department. Since 1983 he has been an instructor of physics and systems engi­
neering for the JHU Part-Time Graduate Programs. Dr. Krill has published numer­
ous articles in guided wave technology and electromagnetic scattering and holds a 
number of U.S. patents. During the 1970s and 1980s he led several systems engi­
neering efforts and critical experiments associated with the Aegis and Battle Group 
AAW Coordination programs. He is one of the founders of the CEC concept, 
having developed and analyzed many of its requirements since 1974. He served as 
Lead System Engineer for CEC from 1987 through 1996, including the 1996 Moun­
tain Top ACTD. He is presently serving as the APL point of contact for the ASN/
RDA Chief Engineer Technical Advisory Group and was the technical lead for the 
Concept Formulation Working Group for the BMDO/Navy Missile Defense Con­
cept Development Study. His e-mail address is jerry.krill@jhuapl.edu. 
