

===== PAGE 1 =====
272 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002)
S.  MOSKOWITZ,  R.  J.  GASSLER,  and  B.  L.  PAULHAMUS 
D
A Comparison of Tactical Ballistic Missile Defense 
Engagement Coordination Schemes
Simon Moskowitz, Rebecca J. Gassler, and Bart L. Paulhamus
ealing with large ballistic missile raids will require an unprecedented level of syn­
ergy between dissimilar air defense units because any individual unit will likely be over­
whelmed.  Shooter selection schemes currently in use include unbidded first launch and 
unique defended asset assignment. These methods only attempt deconfliction to avoid a 
“free fire” situation. Past analysis has shown that a scheme exists that yields much better 
results than these unit-centric schemes. That scheme fits into the distributed engage­
ment decision paradigm of preferred shooter selection. This article uses the APL Coor­
dinated Engagement Simulation (ACES) to contrast the performance of the aforemen­
tioned schemes in a realistic simulation environment. The distributions of raid outcomes 
for each scheme under two configurations, ideal and achievable, are compared. Operating 
conditions are examined through selecting real-world options and modeling underlying 
probability distributions, where applicable. 
INTRODUCTION
When tactical ballistic missiles (TBMs) are used in 
the future, they will likely come in a massive raid and 
be more advanced than in the past. Dealing with such 
a raid will require an unprecedented level of synergy 
between dissimilar air defense units because any indi­
vidual unit will likely be overwhelmed. Continued unit-
centric and service-independent doctrine and warfare 
impede achievement of this goal. Shooter selection 
schemes currently in use include unbidded first launch 
and unique defended asset assignment. These methods 
only attempt deconfliction to avoid a “free fire” situ­
ation. In addition to minimizing the number of unin­
tentional overengagements, which these schemes strive 
for, the more important aspiration of minimizing leakers 
(i.e., TBMs that penetrate defenses) must be addressed. 
Minimizing leakers means minimizing free riders (i.e., 
unengaged threats) and maximizing depth of fire (i.e., 
number of salvos separated by kill assessment periods), 
as well as selecting the engagements that have the 
greatest chance of success. For area tactical ballistic mis­
sile defense (TBMD) systems, reengagement after kill 
assessment is seldom possible.
Past analysis has shown that a scheme exists that 
yields much better results than the unit-centric 
schemes. That scheme fits into the distributed engage­
ment decision (DED) paradigm of preferred shooter 
selection. In this scheme, individual units estimate 
their own effectiveness and schedule their own shots, 


===== PAGE 2 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002) 
273
COMPARISON OF TBMD ENGAGEMENT COORDINATION SCHEMES
the information is distributed, and then all units use a 
common algorithm to arrive at a synchronized engage­
ment assignment solution for the force. Units defer 
their own shots if they are not preferred.
This article contrasts results using the aforemen­
tioned schemes (free fire, first launch, unique defended 
asset assignment, and DED) in a realistic simulation 
environment. The distributions of raid outcomes (e.g., 
leakers, free riders, overengagements) for each scheme 
under two configurations, ideal and achievable, are 
compared. Operating conditions are examined through 
selecting real-world options and modeling underly­
ing probability distributions, where applicable. With 
the creation of the APL Coordinated Engagement 
Simulation (ACES), generation of the air picture is 
modeled at an adequate level of fidelity, including 
multi-object threats with aspect-dependent radar cross 
section (RCS), “just-in-time” radar search setup, launch 
event counting (i.e., estimating how many TBMs were 
launched), clustering (i.e., deciding which objects origi­
nated from which TBM), primary object track (POT) 
selection (i.e., which objects should be chosen to rep­
resent each TBM), and correlation. Communications 
over a network similar to Link 16 account for latency 
via bandwidth, time, and content-constrained transmis­
sion. Probability of kill depends on other actions and 
outcomes during the raid, such as whether the lethal 
object is being tracked by a radar.
ACES ENGAGEMENT 
COORDINATION SCHEMES
The current version of ACES, version 0.9, imple­
ments four different engagement coordination schemes: 
free fire, simple sectored with unique defended asset 
assignment, first launch, and DED. This section briefly 
explains the first three schemes and then presents a 
detailed discussion of the last scheme. Information on 
engagement coordination scheme taxonomy and future 
schemes to be implemented in ACES is discussed in the 
article by Shafer et al., this issue.
Free Fire
The free fire engagement scheme is the most primi­
tive of the four coordination schemes. Actually, this 
scheme involves no coordination. All of the defending 
units act independently and are free to fire at what­
ever they want. This scheme is often used to illustrate 
the need for coordination because it usually performs 
poorly. Units often end up firing at the first threats to 
appear. This results in the units expending all their 
radar resources, thereby overengaging (i.e., launching 
more defensive missiles than the force firing policy calls 
for—one salvo per threat in this article) a few threats 
while later threats become free riders (i.e., threats that 
are never shot at; they receive a “free ride”). In general, 
the more the coverage of each unit overlaps, the worse 
free fire will perform.
Simple Sectored
Simple sectored engagement schemes are unbidded, 
static schemes that do not rely on any communica­
tions. In the most familiar variant of the simple sectored 
category (the one discussed in this article), all of the 
defended assets are divided among the units in a force 
so that each asset is assigned to only one unit. The units 
only engage threats that are aimed at one of their own 
defended assets. Much preplanning is involved so that 
the defended assets are assigned to the different units in 
an intelligent manner.
One advantage of this scheme is that it is very simple 
to implement because it does not use any communi­
cations. Another advantage is that it usually produces 
a very low number of overengagements because the 
engagement decision is well defined. The only time 
an overengagement occurs is when a threat’s predicted 
impact area overlaps two assets defended by two differ­
ent units or when two units disagree on the target’s pre­
dicted impact area.
However, the scheme’s main disadvantage occurs 
when one unit’s assets receive most of the threats in a 
raid. This usually causes the unit to be overwhelmed and 
unable to engage all the threats, resulting in free riders. 
At the same time, simple sectored does not permit a 
neighboring unit to help the overwhelmed unit, even if 
the neighboring unit’s assets are not being attacked and 
the neighboring unit can engage threats aimed toward 
the overwhelmed unit’s assets. This leads to the force 
underutilizing its resources while letting threats attack 
some defended assets without any engagement.
First Launch
The third engagement coordination scheme imple­
mented by ACES is first launch. The rules of this 
scheme allow the units in a force to act independently 
while planning engagements. From a force command 
and control (C2) perspective, units are not aware of 
inorganic (i.e., other units’) threat–weapon pairing until 
they are notified of (defending) missile launch. How­
ever, once a unit launches against a threat, it sends 
out an engagement message stating that it has launched 
against that track. Upon receiving the message, all 
other units that were planning an engagement against 
the same track defer. If, for some reason, there is an 
interceptor failure, the firing unit will send out another 
engagement message with the status “engagement ter­
minated.” This will allow other units to then schedule 
an engagement against that track number again. The 
scheme is unbidded and dynamic, and relies on a simple 
communications network. In a low-density (spatial 
and temporal) raid, it may be possible to implement 


===== PAGE 3 =====
274 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002)
S.  MOSKOWITZ,  R.  J.  GASSLER,  and  B.  L.  PAULHAMUS 
a variant of this scheme without any communications 
network; units would track other friendly units’ missile 
launches and predict which threat they were heading 
toward.
One main advantage of the first launch scheme is 
that it attempts to minimize the number of free riders by 
allowing every unit that can shoot against a threat to do 
so unless another unit has already engaged it. When com­
pared against simple sectored, this scheme does a good 
job at letting units help an overwhelmed unit. Another 
big advantage is that it is easy to implement; it does 
not require changes to the communications network and 
only impinges minimally on unit-level autonomy.
In first launch, the units’ unique capabilities versus 
certain threats do not affect the choice of shooter. All 
Navy area TBMD units have nearly the same predicted 
intercept point (on the target trajectory), regardless of 
their location, because of the small endo-atmospheric 
intercept window. The unit farthest away from the pre­
dicted intercept point has the longest interceptor time 
of flight (TOF). Therefore, the farthest unit is the first 
one to launch, if it is not already too busy. Thus, often a 
unit that is uniquely capable against a certain threat will 
have launched against threats that other units could 
have engaged, and then that unit may not have any 
(radar) resources left to engage the ones only it could 
have taken, resulting in free riders. The farthest engage­
ments may also be the engagement opportunities with 
the least chance of success, increasing the number of 
leakers in the scenario.
Another disadvantage is the scheme’s reliance on 
the communications network. If the network is slow, 
the engagement messages may arrive too late for the 
other units to cancel their own engagements, resulting 
in overengagements. Overengagement can also occur, 
no matter how fast the communications network is, 
when units are positioned on contours of constant TOF, 
causing their launch times to be identical. Dual tracks 
will inevitably also lead to an overengagement because 
the units think they are engaging different threats. Also, 
incorrectly correlating tracks can result in one unit 
confusing the engagement message against a particular 
threat as an engagement message against a different 
threat, resulting in free riders. Of course, these last two 
disadvantages apply to all dynamic schemes.
Distributed Engagement Decision
ACES currently implements a scheme from the DED 
category. It is the only bidded scheme that has been 
implemented in ACES, version 0.9. DED schemes are 
also dynamic and rely heavily on a communications 
network. Because this is a very complex scheme that 
may be new to many readers, it will be described in more 
detail than the three previous schemes.
In the DED scheme, all units in a force share informa­
tion about their possible engagements and then the force 
makes intelligent decisions about which units should 
engage which threats. From a force C2 perspective, early 
awareness of threat–weapon pairings provides a basis for 
command reaction, as needed. The fundamental idea 
behind the scheme is as follows: if all the units use the 
same engagement information with the same engage­
ment selection algorithm, all the units will arrive at the 
same engagement decisions.
Like first launch, the DED scheme has the advan­
tage over simple sectored of allowing neighboring units 
to help each other. However, the main advantage of 
this scheme is its bidded property. Unlike first launch, 
where the coordination takes place after the engage­
ment has been made, DED makes decisions before the 
actual engagements. This allows the scheme to make 
intelligent decisions toward balancing and optimizing 
all of the engagements for the force.
The main disadvantage of DED is its dependence on 
a communications network. The communications net­
work is even more important to the DED scheme than 
the first launch scheme because much more information 
is being shared. Another disadvantage is its susceptibil­
ity to errors caused by miscorrelation.
The next four sections give more details about the 
DED scheme. First, a database is described for orga­
nizing all of the possible engagement information for 
the entire force. Then the selection algorithm for decid­
ing which of the engagements should be carried out is 
explained. As part of this algorithm, the shot elimina­
tion tests and criteria are defined.  Both the database 
and the selection algorithm exist on every unit.
Data Management
Because of the complexity of the DED scheme, data 
management is very important. Information must be 
shared, stored, and processed uniformly across all units. 
Engagement information for the entire force is shared 
via engagement messages and stored in a force engage­
ment schedule (FES) on each unit. The FES contains 
every possible engagement within the force. The entries 
on the FES are defined by a threat, unit, weapon, and 
shot number. The threat is the TBM track that is 
expected to impact a defended asset, the unit is the unit 
that has the shot against the threat, the weapon is the 
unit’s weapon for the shot, and the shot number is the 
number of the shot in a salvo. Currently in ACES all 
units have only one weapon, Standard Missile-2 Block 
IVA, and all engagements are dual salvos. Therefore, for 
each unit, threat pairing can only result in two entries 
on its FES (one for each shot in a salvo).
 Each unit uses the FES to decide which one should 
shoot at which threats. To make that decision, the 
entries on the FES are used to build a temporary hier­
archical database with three levels: group (the highest 
level), threat, and possible shot. Within each group are 
threats that are spatially very close together. Within 


===== PAGE 4 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002) 
275
COMPARISON OF TBMD ENGAGEMENT COORDINATION SCHEMES
each threat level are the possible shots against that 
threat. Figure 1 shows an example of the database from 
a simple scenario, which contains three threats (A, B, 
and C) and three units (1, 2, and 3). A line connect­
ing a unit to a threat denotes that the unit is engage­
able against that threat. In this example, unit 1 is only 
engageable against threat A. The dashed ovals represent 
threat groups. In the figure, threats B and C have been 
assembled into group II. The database format shows 
how this example scenario would be organized within 
the DED database.
Engagement Selection Algorithm
The engagement selection algorithm has two main 
parts. The first part builds the database and the second 
selects a preferred shot for each threat in the database.
Building the database. The following five steps build 
the database:
1. Build the threat level.
2. Add the possible shots to each threat.
3. Combine threats into groups.
4. Freeze groups.
5. Order the groups.
Step 1 creates the threat level of the database by 
making every unique threat on the FES a threat in the 
database. Step 2 adds the possible shots to each threat 
in the database by walking through the FES and adding 
each shot to its corresponding threat. Once the threat 
and shot levels of the database are created, step 3 cre­
ates the group level by collecting threats that have a 
geometric separation distance less than the group dis­
tance threshold into the same group. When objects are 
closely spaced, they may become cross-correlated (e.g., 
when there are really two threats and two units agree 
that there are two threats, but one unit labels them A 
and B and the other unit labels them B and A). If one 
unit is declared to have all the pre­
ferred shots for every threat within 
a group, an overengagement and a 
free rider can be avoided. If all of 
the threats within a group do not 
have at least one possible shot from 
the same unit, the group is divided. 
A threat can only belong to one 
group, and every threat is in a group, 
even if there is only one threat in a 
group.
After the entire database is built, 
the information is organized before 
being processed by the preferred 
shot selection algorithm. Step 4 
freezes certain groups in the data­
base. A group is frozen when there is 
not enough time to act on a change 
made to the preferred shot of one 
1
2
3
A
B
C
I
II
Group I
Group II
Threat A
Ship 1’s
shot
Threat B
Threat C
Ship 2’s
shot
Ship 3’s
shot
Ship 2’s
shot
Ship 3’s
shot
Example scenario
Database
Figure 1.  Example illustrating DED database construction.
of the threats in the group (i.e., it is within minimum 
coordination time of planned time to launch). If a group 
is frozen, none of its threats’ preferred shots can be 
changed. Therefore, the group is skipped in the selec­
tion algorithm.
The final step in the process orders the groups in the 
database  according to the following criteria: frozen, size, 
uniquely capable, maximum threat priority, and maxi­
mum threat number. The database is sorted because the 
preferred shot selection algorithm is run on the database 
so that higher priority is given to the more important 
threats.
Running the preferred shot selection algorithm. After 
the database is built and organized, the preferred shot 
selection algorithm is run. The goal of the algorithm is to 
remove the less desirable possible shots from each threat 
until only one possible shot remains for each threat. That 
shot is then called the “preferred shot” for the threat. 
The unit with the preferred shot against a threat is the 
preferred shooter for that threat. In Aegis, the second 
shot of the dual salvo is not scheduled until the first shot 
is in flight. Thus, in ACES, each (Aegis area TBMD) 
unit only has one possible scheduled shot against each 
threat, so finding the preferred shooter for a threat is the 
same as finding the preferred shot. In addition, because 
the same unit must engage every threat in a group, find­
ing the preferred shooter for a group is the same as find­
ing the preferred shot for every threat within that group. 
Therefore, another way of stating the goal of the elimina­
tion tests is to find a preferred shooter for each group.
Elimination Tests
Elimination tests are used to find a preferred shot for 
every threat in the scenario by sequentially removing 
possible shots from each threat. This is accomplished 
by sieving each group through a series of eight criteria. 
After each elimination test, if only one possible shot 


===== PAGE 5 =====
276 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002)
S.  MOSKOWITZ,  R.  J.  GASSLER,  and  B.  L.  PAULHAMUS 
remains for each threat in the group, sieving on that 
group is complete. Many possible criteria could be used 
in the elimination tests, and the order in which the 
tests are performed is just as important as the tests them­
selves. The eight tests and the order in which they 
are performed in ACES is just one possibility. After 
ACES is able to model more diverse systems, such as the 
Navy Theater Wide system, and more scenarios have 
been examined, other DED variants with different tests 
and/or different orderings of tests will be investigated. 
This section explains, in order, the eight elimination 
tests used in this particular DED scheme. 
1.  Notification time test eliminates the possible shots 
that do not allow the force enough time to coordinate. 
This is done by removing all shots that have a latest 
time-to-launch that is less than the current time plus 
the minimum coordination time. The minimum coordi­
nation time is an estimate of the least amount of time 
necessary to guarantee that—after a decision is made on 
one unit—there is enough time for the same decision to 
be made on all other units.
2.  Maximum concurrent engagement test removes 
possible shots that cannot be carried out because the 
shot’s unit has already reached its hard engagement 
capacity (i.e., maximum number of engagements that a 
unit can carry out at one time). To determine if a shot 
causes its shooter to exceed its hard engagement capac­
ity, the shot’s number of simultaneous discriminations is 
calculated. Discrimination in this context is expending 
additional radar resources to gather metrics to determine 
which TBM object to intercept. The number of simul­
taneous discriminations for a particular shot is found 
by counting all of the unit’s discriminations (current 
engagements and predicted engagements of higher prior­
ity) that overlap the discrimination time needed for that 
shot. The test eliminates a shot from a threat if the shot’s 
number of simultaneous discriminations is greater than 
the unit’s hard engagement capacity.
3.  Inventory sufficiency test eliminates possible 
shots from a threat’s possible shot list if the shot’s 
shooter does not have enough inventory to carry out the 
engagement. To support one of its shots being selected 
as a preferred shot, a unit must have enough planned 
inventory to engage all the threats within the group. 
A unit’s planned inventory is the amount of inventory 
left after accounting for all of its other preferred shots of 
higher priority.
4.  Engagement loading test tries to balance the 
number of simultaneous engagements for a unit across 
all the units in the force to facilitate engagement of a 
future threat that may be engageable by only a specific 
unit. This is done by comparing the number of simulta­
neous discriminations calculated in the maximum con­
current engagement test to the unit’s soft engagement 
capacity. The latter is the maximum number of engage­
ments at one time that can be handled by a unit without 
stress. It must be large enough so that other criteria can 
be used to make preferred shot decisions. The actual test 
removes a shot if the shooting unit’s number of simul­
taneous discriminations is greater than the soft engage­
ment capacity of the unit.
For any threat in the group, if all the shots on the 
threat’s possible shot list are removed by the engage­
ment loading test, it means that all of the units that 
can engage the threat are already under stress. For this 
reason, all the possible shot lists for every threat in the 
group are restored to their pretest status. After all, engag­
ing a threat under stress is better than not engaging it.
5.  Reengagement test tries to maximize the number 
of reengagement opportunities. It eliminates possible 
shots that do not allow for another intercept opportu­
nity. A shot allows a reengagement against a threat if 
the shot’s latest time-to-launch is greater than or equal 
to the predicted time of intercept, plus the kill assess­
ment time, plus the minimum coordination time. The 
test works by checking if any of the shots within the 
group allow for a reengagement. If a unit has no shots 
that allow for a reengagement, all of that unit’s shots are 
removed from the threat’s possible shot lists.
For any threat in the group, if all the shots on the 
threat’s possible shot list are removed by the reengage­
ment test, it means that none of the units has a reen­
gagement opportunity. Therefore, all the possible shot 
lists for every threat in the group are restored to their 
pretest status.
6.  Maximum inventory test attempts to balance the 
amount of available inventory for each unit across the 
force. The test removes a unit’s possible shot from a 
threat if another unit with significantly more inventory 
has a possible shot (i.e., their inventory difference is 
greater than the inventory test tolerance). It  uses the 
planned inventory associated with each shot from the 
inventory sufficiency test.
7.  Time-of-flight test breaks a tie in case a group 
still has more than one possible preferred shooter. For 
each group, a unit’s shot TOFs against each threat in 
that group are added together. The result is the total 
TOF necessary if that unit is selected as the preferred 
shooter. The unit with the least amount of total TOF is 
selected as the preferred shooter against the group, and 
for each threat in the group, all shots on the threat’s 
possible shot list not belonging to the preferred shooter 
are removed.
8.  Unit number test is executed in the rare case that 
two units have shots with exactly the same amount of 
total TOF against all the threats in a group. This test 
selects the unit with the lowest unit number as the 
preferred shooter. Then all shots on each threat’s pos­
sible shot list not performed by the preferred shooter 
are removed. Because this is the last of the elimination 
tests, it must leave only one shot on each threat’s pos­
sible shot list. Since ACES only has one weapon type 


===== PAGE 6 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002) 
277
COMPARISON OF TBMD ENGAGEMENT COORDINATION SCHEMES
and does not divide salvos, examining the unit number is enough to ensure 
this condition. However, when ACES expands to using multiple weapons 
and dividing salvos among units, this test will also need to be expanded.
Elimination Criteria Constants
Table 1 lists the values of the elimination criteria constants used for this 
analysis.
thought that these threats would be 
physically engageable, but as shown 
in the figure, this is not always true 
because of differences in modeling.
Communications Network
Navy Network 021A was used1 
as the basis for developing a reason­
able Link 16 network (Fig. 3) for 
this scenario. It is assumed that the 
Cooperative Engagement Capabil­
ity (CEC) of this era is still limited 
to anti-air warfare, although future 
analysis with ACES will include a 
space track picture based on CEC-
like sensor fusion. The dashed lines 
in Fig. 3 indicate network par­
ticipation groups (NPGs) relayed 
by an E-2C Hawkeye or E-3A 
Airborne Warning and Control 
System. Although not shown on 
the maps, this network was sized 
for 20 of the C2 units and 36 of the 
fighters present in the theater. On 
the surveillance NPG, time slots 
were allocated as follows: 18 for 
the Theater High-Altitude Area 
Defense battery, 30 for the Patriot 
Battalion Information Coordina­
tion Central, and 8 for each of 
the other C2 units (including Aegis 
area TBMD ships); this allows 
all units at least one opportunity 
to transmit every 1.5 s. On the 
Engagement Coordination NPG, 
each of the potential shooters was 
given 14 time slots, yielding a trans­
mission opportunity every 0.875 s.
Table 1. Values of elimination criteria constants.
 
 
Value used 
Constant name 
Usage 
in this analysis
Minimum coordination time 
Notification time test 
4.375 s (ideal); 
 
 
12.25 s (achievable)
Soft engagement  capacity 
Engagement loading test 
3
Hard engagement capacity 
Maximum concurrent  
5
 
  engagement test
Inventory test tolerance 
Maximum inventory test 
3
Group distance threshold 
Grouping 
1000 m
Table 2. Impact locations of 
threats.
Asset no. 
Threat nos. 
6 
20 
7 
1, 3–5, 17 
8 
None 
12 
13, 14, 16 
13 
12 
15 
11
20 
7, 8, 19
22 
None
24 
2, 6, 9, 10, 15, 18
25 
None
ACES ANALYSIS
Scenario
This scenario uses selected TBM launch and impact points from day 
D+5 from the Northeast Asia scenario used in the Capstone and Navy 
TBMD Cost and Operational Effectiveness assessments. Threat trajectories 
were generated using the Defense Intelligence Agency/Missile and Space 
Intelligence Center’s six-degree-of-freedom model, DICE. Four units defend 
against 20 threats launched from five launch areas. Fifteen of the threats are 
Scud Cs and five are No Dongs, which have reentry vehicles (RVs) that 
separate from the spent booster shortly after burnout. There are 29 entries 
on the defended asset list for this scenario, but only 10 of them can be 
defended from all launch areas by at least one of the ships. Seven of these 10 
are near the aimpoints and actual impact points in the raid. 
Table 2 shows the defended assets used, as well as the number of threats 
that impact at each one. However, the defended asset sizes were increased 
to encompass the impact points because the aimpoints were at facilities not 
actually contained within the assets. For example, a fuel storage tank on a 
dock was targeted and the assigned defended asset was the naval base on the 
other side of the dock. Impact time for the 20 threats was randomly distrib­
uted over 10 s for each Monte Carlo run. The four unit locations were based 
on those used for the aforementioned Cost and Operational Effectiveness 
assessments.
In this scenario, not every unit is in position to engage every threat; 
this is realistic and challenging. Figure 2 shows which units are physically 
engageable against each threat. In fact, none of the 20 threats is engage­
able by all four units. Nine threats are engageable by three units, seven are 
engageable by two units, and four are engageable by only one unit. There is 
no chance for reengagement to occur in this scenario because of the size of 
the area TBMD engagement volume and speed of the threats.
The radar setup is based on planned pairs of launch areas and defended 
assets (see Modeling Fidelity and Assumptions). The yellow shading in 
the boxes in Fig. 2 signifies that—for the given unit—the indicated threat 
was from a planned launch area/defended asset pair. In planning, it was 


===== PAGE 7 =====
278 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002)
S.  MOSKOWITZ,  R.  J.  GASSLER,  and  B.  L.  PAULHAMUS 
Modeling Fidelity and 
Assumptions
ACES version 0.9 was used as the modeling 
environment to conduct the study documented 
in this article. ACES is being created to pro­
vide a modeling and simulation framework for 
the development and analysis of advanced dis­
tributed weapons coordination concepts. As 
such, it helps analyze the performance and 
interactions of multiple weapon and sensor sys­
tems when they are deployed as an integrated 
theater air and missile defense force facing the 
full spectrum of theater air and missile threats. 
ACES functionality accurately represents unit-
level engagement decision, control, and exe­
cution processes in a relatively complex envi­
ronment (i.e., multi-sensor, multi-weapon, and 
multi-target). Weapon and sensor control 
functions, functional flow, and information 
exchange are being modeled with sufficient 
fidelity to facilitate the evaluation of alterna­
tive concepts for automated engagement coor­
dination and the assessment of force- and unit-
level effectiveness and efficiency in performing 
multiple simultaneous theater air and missile 
defense missions.
ACES version 0.9 is limited to Aegis area 
TBMD; other TBMD unit types and warfare 
areas will be implemented in the future. 
Engagement coordination performance was 
compared under two sets of conditions:
• Ideal: an abstract set without problems 
caused by limited search setup and re- 
sources, track inaccuracy, correlation errors, 
Figure 2.  Planned pairs for (a) free fire, first launch, and DED and (b) 
simple sectored.
Figure 3.  Modified Link 16 network (RTT = round-trip timing, PPLI = precise participant 
location and ID).
lack of communication band­
width, or imperfect interceptor 
performance
• Achievable: a more realistic set 
including these disturbances to 
the air picture and nonunitary 
probability of kill
Unlike 
in 
anti-air 
warfare, 
TBMD hemispherical search cov­
erage is not possible with current 
radar resources because of the need 
to detect targets at much greater 
distances. For the ideal set, this real­
ity was ignored and a hemisphere of 
maximum waveform was used. For 
Aegis Baseline 6 Phase 3, the solu­
tion implemented was construction 
of search sectors with the goal of 
detecting TBMs only early enough 
to complete a minimum reaction 
time engagement for intercept at 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Threats
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Defending units
Defending units
(a)
(b)
P = planned for in the radar setup
= physically engageable
08
152
336
496
880
1104 12141310
1534
Timeslots
Net entry
RTT-B (8)
PPLI-A (144)
PPLI-B (184)
Mission management (160)
Surveillance (384)
Engagement coordination (224)
Fighter-to-fighter advisory (2)
Fighter-to-fighter targeting (108)
Air control uplink (32)
Air control backlink (64)
Voice (224)
Net 126
Net 0
Net 21
•
•
•
•
•
•


===== PAGE 8 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002) 
279
COMPARISON OF TBMD ENGAGEMENT COORDINATION SCHEMES
the planned altitude. The APL-developed Array Radar 
Guaranteed Useful Search tool was used to generate 
such types of search sectors (waveform, slant range 
limits, and slant range rate limits as functions of beam 
position, along with the search frame time) for use in 
the achievable set. Each ship was assigned an Aegis 
resource planning and assessment (RP&A) extended air 
defense mission (goal of 95% probability of track initia­
tion at least 20 s before the special auto-TBMD reac­
tion time for the planned launch). The RCS values used 
in planning represent the constant mean value for the 
lethal object used in a Swerling IV distribution (i.e., 
what RP&A intends to use). However, for detection 
and tracking, ACES uses a roll-averaged, frequency-
averaged (over AN/SPY-1B[V]/D band), vertical-ver­
tical polarized, aspect-dependent RCS for each TBM 
piece as the mean in a Swerling IV distribution because 
this approach is believed to be more accurate.
In ACES, once the target is in track, the accuracies 
of the measurement are based on the signal-to-noise 
ratio return. A generic approach is used to manipulate 
these raw accuracies to approximate the effects of filter­
ing. The track measurements are created by randomly 
drawing from a normal distribution using the calculated 
standard deviations of error and the target ground truth 
values as the means. Local bias errors are then added to 
the measurements. These biases represent residual errors 
in sensor registration and navigation. At the beginning 
of the simulation run, position and orientation bias 
errors are randomly drawn for each sensor, and these 
biases are held constant throughout. When reporting on 
a track, the standard deviation of the residual network 
bias is added to the covariance of the track state. The 
radar measurement and track accuracies used for the 
achievable set were commensurate with those from the 
AN/SPY-1B(V)/D radar present on Aegis area TBMD 
ships. Residual bias standard deviations representative 
of CEC operations were used because operational num­
bers for Link 16 were not available. The Link 16 require­
ment is 8.7 mrad and 150 m in range,2  and the Aegis 
ownship sensor installation and navigation misalign­
ment requirement is significantly better than the Link 
16 requirement, but not as good as that achieved by 
CEC. It is known that Aegis ships achieve much better 
sensor registration than the Link 16 requirement, and 
it was assumed that sensor registration should provide 
some benefit over ownship misalignment. For the ideal 
set, all measurements and tracks were assumed to have 
no position or velocity errors, and correlation of remote 
tracks to local tracks was perfect. More details of 
the ACES detection, track, and correlation modeling 
methodology are available in the article by Bates et al., 
this issue.
 For the nonideal set of runs, two messages were 
allowed per time slot. For the ideal set, this limit 
was removed. ACES exchanges data in the J3.6 space 
track message and the J3.0 reference point message (to 
communicate impact point) on the Surveillance NPG. 
ACES also exchanges data in an enhanced engagement 
status message (including J10.2I and J10.2C2 engage­
ment status words); this is necessary for the DED scheme 
to function. Further details on how communications 
networks operate in ACES are available in the article 
by McDonald et al., this issue.
ACES currently performs ground truth clustering; an 
RV is selected as the POT and clustered with its spent 
booster if they are both in track. Future versions of 
ACES will perform clustering and linking on the local 
track picture based on logic consistent with Aegis Base­
line 6 Phase 3.
ACES threat assessment, engageability, and schedul­
ing are performed on local tracks in a manner consis­
tent with Aegis Baseline 6 Phase 3, although scheduling 
required changes previously mentioned (i.e., the addi­
tion of the “deferred” engagement status and use of the 
preferred shooter indicator) to accommodate the DED 
scheme. Future versions of ACES will also allow these 
functions to be performed on remote tracks. Threat 
assessment projects the track state of the POT and forms 
a 3‑ impact point error ellipse. The POT is given the 
priority of the highest-priority defended asset, which 
has any area within the ellipse. Engageability projects 
the POT (again ignoring drag) through the appropriate 
irregular hexagon in downrange vs. altitude space as a 
function of cross range and specific energy. 
The number of simultaneous target discriminations 
allowed to be scheduled by a platform is five; this is the 
number chosen for past analysis and construction of the 
scenario, and represented the best estimate of capability 
at the time. The threshold and objective requirements 
for the number of simultaneous discriminations are con­
tained in the Naval TBMD Operational Requirements 
Document. The priorities for choosing which engage­
ments to schedule, in order, are as follows: (1) if the unit 
is the preferred shooter on this track, (2) higher threat 
priority, and (3) earlier latest time to launch. These 
functions, as well as force engagement selection (i.e., 
deciding on preferred shots), are performed periodically 
every second.
ACES engagement outcome has several probabilis­
tic tests: launcher failures, missile prelaunch reliability, 
missile in-flight reliability, uplink/downlink reliability, 
handover/designation, and lethality. These tests do not 
depend on geometry (but do depend on whether the RV 
is in track). Geometric dependence is planned for future 
versions of ACES.
Results
Because this scenario is saturated (i.e., number of 
simultaneous discriminations  number of shooters  
depth of fire per shooter = number of threats), each 
overengagement will lead to a free rider, except in cases 


===== PAGE 9 =====
280 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002)
S.  MOSKOWITZ,  R.  J.  GASSLER,  and  B.  L.  PAULHAMUS 
where not all discriminations overlap. Each unit can 
only perform five simultaneous discriminations. In cer­
tain raid timings, units may be able to engage six 
threats because one intercept occurs before the next dis­
crimination must begin. In the free rider, overengage­
ment, and leaker figures shown throughout the text, the 
orange horizontal lines indicate the actual results of the 
100 Monte Carlo runs; the light yellow portions repre­
sent a 95% confidence interval. In the ideal case, the 
leaker and free rider charts are the same because the 
effective probability of kill of the missile equals 1.
Ideal
Free fire. In free fire, there are almost always four or 
five free riders, as seen in Fig. 4. This can be explained 
by the way the units determine which threats to engage. 
Because the units in the ideal case have detected each 
threat with plenty of time to engage it, they have a 
fairly complete picture of the raid. When a unit sched­
ules intercepts, it prioritizes the threats by threat prior­
ity and then by the earliest latest time to launch. By 
looking at the threat levels and which unit can engage 
which threat, it can be determined that only two out 
of six threats to asset 24 (see Table 2) will be engaged. 
This means that each run is guaranteed at least four free 
riders. It is also true that two units will each engage 
four out of five threats to asset 7. Depending on the 
latest times to launch for each unit, this could lead to 
one free rider and will guarantee three or four over-
engagements. Figure 5 shows that in cases where a unit 
can engage six threats, there is almost always another 
overengagement.
Simple sectored. Because of the way the assets were 
assigned in the simple sectored case and the way the 
raid actually occurs, several units have more threats 
against their assets than they can possibly defend. This 
situation leads to a higher number of free riders than 
with free fire. Also, one unit has none of its defended 
assets threatened and therefore does not contribute to 
the defense. Table 3 shows the number of threats that 
each unit must defend against.
Unit 1 will be able to engage all of its threats. In 
most cases, unit 2 will miss two of its threats and unit 
3 will miss four. This accounts for the large percentage 
of cases with six free riders. For a smaller percentage of 
the time there are only five free riders because unit 2 or 
3 was able to engage six threats, as shown in the table.
As seen in Fig. 5, there are never any overengage­
ments in the simple sectored case. Because this engage­
ment scheme has static defended asset assignments and 
the units have perfect knowledge of the track states in 
the ideal runs, they will never confuse the impact point 
of a threat. This means that a unit will never believe 
that a threat is targeting its defended asset if it is not. 
Therefore, the units will only engage threats to their 
defended assets.
Figure 4.  Free riders (ideal).
Figure 5.  Unintentional overengagements (ideal).
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
Free fire
Simple sectored
First launch
DED
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
Table 3. Number of threats to 
each unit’s defended assets. 
 
No. of threats to
Unit 
assigned assets
1 
4
2 
7
3 
9
4 
0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
Free fire
Simple sectored
First launch
DED
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10


===== PAGE 10 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002) 
281
COMPARISON OF TBMD ENGAGEMENT COORDINATION SCHEMES
First launch. As shown in Fig. 4, first launch per­
forms better than both free fire and simple sectored. 
Like free fire, this scheme allows all units to potentially 
engage all threats that are physically engageable and in 
local track. Unlike free fire, an engagement status mes­
sage is sent once a unit has launched to prevent other 
units from engaging the same threat. This dramatically 
cuts down the number of overengagements between 
free fire and first launch. The only time an overengage­
ment can occur in the ideal case is when two units 
must launch at nearly the same time. This does not 
allow time for an engagement status message to be 
received before launcher assignment/missile commit. 
By having fewer overengagements, the units are avail­
able to fire at what may have become free riders in the 
free fire case. This does not mean that there are never 
free riders. In this scenario, units 1 and 4 may each 
be left with less than five threats that they can engage 
because units 2 and 3 fired first. This leaves several 
threats that units 1 and 4 cannot engage, while units 2 
and 3 are occupied.
Distributed engagement decision. Figures 4 and 5 
show that under the ideal configuration, the DED 
scheme outperforms all the others. Overengagements 
seldom occurred, leaving each unit free to carry out its 
maximum number of simultaneous engagements. The 
three times overengagements happened were when a 
dual track resulted from a unit that never locally tracked 
the spent booster of one of the No Dongs; its RV track 
could not inherit the remote track number from the 
booster as did the other units. Occasionally, free riders 
can still occur because of the sequential nature of the 
current DED algorithm. This scheme had many of the 
advantages of first launch with the added advantage 
that decisions were made well before any of the engage­
ments took place. In the ideal situation, all the targets 
are detected at least 40 s before the first planned launch 
time. Pairing of units to targets before launch solved 
the communications latency problem present in first 
launch.
Achievable
As expected, most of the results under the achiev­
able configuration are worse (a greater number of free 
riders and overengagements) than those obtained under 
the ideal configuration. Most of the discrepancies can 
be attributed to the inferior air picture created in the 
achievable configuration. The achievable air picture 
had fewer threats detected, and those that were detected 
were seen later. Multiple tracks (multiple track num­
bers assigned to the same object) and miscorrelations 
(multiple objects assigned to the same track number) 
further degraded the information available.
Free fire. The results of the achievable case are 
almost the same as the ideal case. However, some of the 
achievable runs had only three free riders. The reason 
for this is likely that fewer threats were detected by the 
units, which then changed the order in which the inter­
cepts were scheduled. This would mean that if a higher-
priority threat was not detected, a lower-priority threat 
that was never engaged in the ideal case is now engaged. 
Figure 6 shows for each planned pair (as seen in Fig. 2a) 
in all runs the amount of time between detection and an 
ideal planned time to launch. Those detected later than 
planned may not yield adequate time to plan and exe­
cute an intercept. There are 708 threats (out of a pos­
sible 4500) that are not detected at all by the planned 
unit. The RP&A methodology failed to meet its goal 
(95% probability of track initialization at least 20 s 
before the special auto-TBMD reaction time for the 
planned launch) because the RCS values used by RP&A 
are too high in this case. The goal is met less often with 
the nominal mission (at the special auto-TBMD reac­
tion time); thus, the extended mission was chosen for 
this article.
Simple sectored. Figures 7 and 8 show that the simple 
sectored results from the achievable configuration were 
nearly the same as the results obtained from the ideal 
configuration (Figs. 4 and 5). The defended assets were 
assigned so that the track errors did not create any 
confusion as to which unit’s defended asset was being 
targeted by a threat. Therefore, no overengagements 
occurred. For the reason previously explained in the 
ideal simple sectored case, there will typically be five 
or six free riders. In other instances, because of statisti­
cal variation, the number of free riders decreased to four 
because units 2 and 3 each had six shots.
First launch. As expected, the results in Figs. 7 and 
8 show that first launch performed worse under the 
achievable conditions than under the ideal conditions. 
Unlike free fire or simple sectored, the overengage-
ment results are considerably different than the ideal 
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Number of occurrences
Time (s)
Figure 6.  Time from detection to planned launch (achievable). A 
total of 84.1%  0.5% (1-) of all objects were detected in time; 
708 objects were not detected at all.


===== PAGE 11 =====
282 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002)
S.  MOSKOWITZ,  R.  J.  GASSLER,  and  B.  L.  PAULHAMUS 
configuration results. This can be explained by the fact 
that first launch relies on a common air picture and a 
communications network, whereas free fire and simple 
sectored do not. In the achievable runs, errors in the 
track picture led to multiple track numbers for the same 
object. Because the force treats that object as more than 
one different threat, overengagements usually result. 
This is a product of the bad air picture and not the 
engagement coordination scheme. In the first launch 
results, 96% of overengagements are caused by multiple 
track numbers for the same object. The remainder of the 
Figure 7.  Free riders (achievable).
overengagements can be attributed to engagement 
status messages arriving too late (nearly simultaneous 
launches). The number of free riders did not increase 
significantly because the units that overengaged threats 
had not always reached their maximum capacity in the 
ideal case.
Distributed engagement decision. Similar to first 
launch, the results in Figs. 7 and 8 show that the 
DED outcomes became considerably worse under the 
achievable conditions. Just like first launch, the degra­
dation can be contributed to the unclean air picture. 
In the DED results, 88% of the overengagements are 
caused by multiple track numbers. Figure 9 shows the 
variability over Monte Carlo runs of the number of 
unique remote track numbers at the earliest planned 
launch time for DED (other schemes are similar). 
The orange portion of the bars indicates boosters with 
remote track numbers; usually at least one booster was 
reported (because someone was not tracking the cor­
responding RV), but not always. The goal was to report 
one track for each of the 20 events; this never hap­
pened. Often there were fewer unique remote track 
numbers than the number of objects (25), but the 
average was 28 (or 1.3 unique remote track numbers 
per object with a remote track number). These extra 
remote track numbers are the result of a failure to 
correlate either initially or because recorrelation is 
not allowed after decorrelation. Miscorrelations (more 
than one object with the same remote track number) 
are more rare, as seen in Fig. 10.
The air picture also varies significantly with time. 
For Monte Carlo run 24, Fig. 11 shows the number of 
objects in track by at least one unit (cyan), the number 
of miscorrelations (yellow), and the number of unique 
remote track numbers (magenta). In this run, several 
decorrelations occur after the first launch at 407 s and 
before the first intercept at 469 s, which can clearly 
cause problems. After successful intercepts occur, the 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
Free fire
Simple sectored
First launch
DED
0       1        2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0       1        2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0       1        2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0       1        2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
Figure 8.  Overengagements (achievable).
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0 0
20
40
60
80
100
Numbers of unique remote track numbers
Monte Carlo iteration
Figure 9.  Multiple remote tracks (snapshot, DED, achievable).
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
Free fire
Simple sectored
First launch
DED
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10


===== PAGE 12 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002) 
283
COMPARISON OF TBMD ENGAGEMENT COORDINATION SCHEMES
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
Number of object miscorrelations
0
20
40
60
80
100
Monte Carlo iteration
Figure 10.  Number of miscorrelations (snapshot, DED, 
achievable).
local tracks on these objects degrade before they are 
dropped, leading to further decorrelations.
As previously mentioned, not all of the planned 
detections always occurred. This reduces the solution 
space (i.e., eligible number of engageable threat/unit 
pairs) for the algorithm. Launches can occur before 
detection of all objects, as seen in Fig. 12. It is impos­
sible to guarantee a correct solution if decisions must be 
made before complete information availability.
More launches occur in DED than in first launch 
because units 1 and 4 nearly always had five targets to 
engage. More launches cause more missile failures (duds 
and failure of uplink or downlink). Each missile failure 
causes an engagement status message with the status 
set to “engagement terminated” to be sent. Once this 
occurs, the algorithm decides again which unit has the 
best shot on that particular track. Currently in the 
model, this is being counted as an overengagement 
because two units engaged the same track. In the future, 
these overengagements will be counted separately from 
the unintentional overengagements. In DED, the other 
units are more likely than in first launch to be avail­
able to shoot because of the load-leveling aspects of the 
algorithm.
Finally, for all schemes, the number of leakers will 
usually exceed the number of free riders in the real 
world because missiles are not infallible. Figure 13 shows 
the number of leakers for the achievable case for all four 
schemes. Only in 1 run out of the 400 did no leakers 
make it through; it was for DED.
CONCLUSIONS
The results reveal two important truths. Under 
ideal conditions, a DED scheme performs significantly 
Figure 11.  Run 24 air picture (DED, achievable). The dashed 
lines represent the first scheduled launch time and the first sched­
uled intercept time.
better (and nearly perfectly in this scenario) than 
other schemes. However, realistic shortcomings in the 
information available to the units blur the differences 
between DED and first launch.
The results of both setup configurations (i.e., ideal 
and achievable) can be used to show a general com­
parison of the four engagement coordination schemes 
implemented in ACES. Using free riders as the metric 
to compare performance, simple sectored proved to be 
the least effective in this particular scenario, closely 
followed by free fire. The two dynamic schemes were 
significantly better, with the DED scheme modeled 
outperforming first launch.
The achievable air picture formed in this scenario 
leaves much to be desired. None of the schemes was 
–100
–50
0
50
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Number of occurrences
Figure 12.  Time from latest detection to earliest planned launch 
(achievable).
No. of miscorrelations
No. of objects tracked by force
No. of unique remote track numbers
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Time (s)


===== PAGE 13 =====
284 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002)
S.  MOSKOWITZ,  R.  J.  GASSLER,  and  B.  L.  PAULHAMUS 
Figure 13.  Leakers (achievable).
able to overcome numerous instances of multiple tracks 
(averaging 1.3 unique remote tracks per object with a 
remote track number), several miscorrelations, and too 
many targets going undetected by units that planned 
to see them. The effects of communication latency and 
changing planned launch times seemed to have less of 
an effect than air picture quality.
FUTURE WORK
There are five main areas for further research. 
1. Investigate excursions in the achievable conditions 
(primarily radar setup and correlation/decorrelation 
rules) to determine what can be changed in the real 
world to improve performance. 
2. Analyze other scenarios (i.e., different theaters, raids, 
and unit locations) to ensure that the conclusions 
here extend to them as well. 
3. Examine other engagement coordination schemes 
that exist, including those being considered for 
use. 
4. Include more defensive systems (e.g., Navy Theater 
Wide, Patriot, and Theater High-Altitude Area 
Defense) that will be present in future conflicts.
5. Allow other warfare areas (i.e., Anti-Air Warfare 
and Overland Cruise Missile Defense) to compete in 
real time for defensive resources.
REFERENCES
  1JNL 198 Quick Reference Guide, NTSCI (1 Nov 1998).
  2Link-16 Operational Specification OS-516.2, Change 2, 3, Published 
under the Direction of CNO (N62) by the Navy Center for Tactical 
Systems Interoperability (Mar 2000).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The authors would like to especially thank the Office 
of Naval Research and the Navy Theater Wide Program Office for funding the 
research discussed in this article. The authors also want to thank the other mem­
bers of the ACES development team (S. R. Allen, C. W. Bates, M. J. Burke, 
J. F. Engler Sr., J. M. Henly, B. L Holub, E. M. McDonald, and K. E. Shafer) for 
their continuing contributions to the modeling and analysis efforts discussed here. 
For further information, please contact R. A. Phillippi, APL Program Manager for 
Joint Missile Defense Projects.
THE AUTHORS
SIMON MOSKOWITZ earned a B.S. in aerospace engineering from the Univer­
sity of Virginia in 1993 and an M.S. in systems engineering from the University of 
Arizona in 1994. He is a Senior Professional Staff member of the Air Defense Sys­
tems Engineering Group. He joined APL in 1994. Theater Air and Missile Defense 
radar search and engagement coordination algorithm development and modeling 
comprise his current primary focus. His expertise includes TBMD threat character­
ization, concept of operations/scenario development, effectiveness analysis, visual­
ization, requirements development, and specification review. His e-mail address is 
simon.moskowitz@jhuapl.edu.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Probability
Free fire
Simple sectored
First launch
DED
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10
0        1       2        3       4        5       6        7       8        9      10


===== PAGE 14 =====
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 23, NUMBERS 2 and 3 (2002) 
285
COMPARISON OF TBMD ENGAGEMENT COORDINATION SCHEMES
REBECCA J. GASSLER graduated from Virginia Tech with a B.S. in aerospace 
engineering. She is currently pursuing an M.S. in information systems and tech­
nology from The Johns Hopkins University. She joined the Air Defense Systems 
Engineering Group in ADSD in June 2000 and has dedicated most of her time to 
working on ACES. Ms. Gassler’s professional interests concern modeling, simula­
tion, and analysis of current and future theater-  and campaign-level operations. Her 
e-mail address is rebecca.gassler@jhuapl.edu.
BART L. PAULHAMUS is a member of APL’s Associate Professional Staff  in the 
Air Defense Systems Department.  He received B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer 
science and engineering from Penn State University in 1998 and 2000, respectively. 
He joined APL in 2000 and is currently working on developing modeling and simu­
lation software for the Air Defense Systems Engineering Group.  His e-mail address 
is bart.paulhamus@jhuapl.edu.
